A Brief Petitionary Offering to the Mātṛkā Pukkasī, Local Protectress of the Jarung Kashor Stūpa
by Dudjom Rinpoche

Namo padmākarāya
Arrange a clean offering bali.
ram yam kham
Cleanse and purify it with raṃ yaṃ khaṃ,
om ah hung
And bless it with oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
hung, yul gyi ming ni balpö yul
Hūṃ! In the land named Nepal,
durtrö ming ni lhündrub tsek
In the charnel ground named Lhundrup Tsek,
chörten ja rung khashor drak
At its famed stūpa the Jarung Kashor,
mamö tsen ni pukkasi
Resides the mātṛkā named Pukkasī.
neyul kyongwé tuwo ché
Great and powerful, you protect this sacred land,
dön la ying kyi yumchen yang
And though ultimately the Great Mother of the Expanse,
nampa shyingkyong mamö tsul
You reveal yourself in manifold forms to those to be tamed,
gang dul namgyur chiryang tön
Appearing as a mātṛkā, local protectress of the sacred site.
ngöntsé traktung heruké
Long ago, when the blood-drinking Heruka
wang du dü né drok su kol
Bound you and made you swear allegiance,
kyilkhor chenpo nyer du té
You became the custodian of the great maṇḍala.
ka yi tenpa kyongwar kö
Thus you were appointed to guard the Buddha’s teachings.
yardam jishyin tatsik lé
Do not stray from your oath so promised,
mi da dorjé naljorma
Natural expression of Vajrayoginī,
rang tsal mamo bum der ché
With your retinue of hundreds of thousands of mātṛkās,
né né kul lo datsur shek
I summon you from your sacred abode—come here now!
gyé shing tsewé nyur jön la
Be delighted, and come swiftly out of affection!
drub ching chöpé né dir shyuk
Take your seat at this place of practice and offering!
chi chö nyerchö tsar du ngar
Outer offerings—perfectly arranged articles,
nang chö döyön trin du tib
Inner offerings—cloud banks of sensual delights,
sangchö men rak tor tsok pung
Secret offerings—gatherings of amṛta, rakta, and feast balis,
yangsang jordrol dewa ché
Innermost offerings—union, liberation and great bliss,
zé mishepé longchö kyi
With these inexhaustible enjoyments,
sol lo chö do tukdam kang
I invoke you! I make offerings to you! May your wishes be fulfilled!
galtrul nongpa zöpar sol
Please forgive my transgressions, confusions and faults!
yönten pal la ngönpar tö
I praise the glory of your qualities,
mindral sungmar ngasol lo
And honour you as a loyal ally.
ngön gyi tukdam shyalshyé gong
Recall your previously made pledges,
sang chen ten dang tendzin dé
And thus never waver from protecting
chökhor chörten yelmé kyong
The great and secret teachings, their holders,The Wheel of Dharma, and the stūpa.
mitün nyepé tsok nam sol
Dispel all misfortunate and harmful circumstances,
tünkyen lektsok gong du por
Increase all favourable and fortunate circumstances,
kyendrö nangwa gé la gyur
Turn living beings’ experience into virtue,
nöjé jungpo tsar chö chik
And annihilate all malevolent beings and spirits!
dorna dakchak naljor gyi
In short, carry out the activity
chi sam drubpé trinlé dzö
Of accomplishing just as we yogis wish!

This was composed by Jikdral Yeshe Dorje in response to Padma’s request.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Stefan Mang and Peter Woods.)