A Concise Recitation of the Preliminary Practice according to the New Treasure of Dudjom
by His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche, Jikdral Yeshe Dorje

1. The Preparation: Reciting the Four Contemplations which Turn the Mind
namo, lumé ten gyi gönpo lama khyen
Homage! O lama, my unfailing and constant protector!
daljor di ni shintu nyepar ka
This free and endowed human birth is very difficult to obtain.
kyé tsé mitak chiwé chöchen yin
Everything that is born is by its nature impermanent and bound to die.
ge dik lé kyi gyundré luwamé
Beneficial and harmful actions bring their inevitable results.
kham sum khorwa dukngal gyatsö ngang
The three realms of saṃsāra are an ocean of suffering.
dren né dak lo chö la gyurwar shok
Recognizing this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
Reciting these verses many times trains the mind properly.
2. The Main Preliminary Practices
2.1 Taking Refuge
With faith that your Root Lama, who essentially embodies the field of refuge of the Three Jewels,
appears in the sky as Guru Rinpoche:
di zung changchub nyingpo matob bar
From now until I obtain the essence of enlightenment,
lama könchok sum la kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Lama, the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha.
Combine with prostrations and recite as much as possible.
2.2 Bodhicitta: Developing the Mind of Awakening
With the field of refuge as your witness, pray:
da né zung té khorwa matong bar
From now until saṃsāra itself is empty,
magyur semchen kün gyi pendé drub
I shall strive for the benefit and well-being of all sentient beings (who were once my very
own parents).
Thus the mind of awakening is developed.
2.3 Offering the Mandala which Accumulates Merit and Wisdom
With an actual heaped mandala that symbolizes the offering recite:
tserab kün gyi lü dang longchö pal
In all my lives, my body, my possessions and all my merits,
tsok nyi dzok chir könchok sum la bul
I offer to the Refuge (Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha) in order to accumulate merit and wisdom.
idam ratna mandala kam nirya tayami
idam ratna maṇḍala kaṃ nirya tayāmi
Offer the mandala many times.
2.4 The Meditation and Recitation of Vajrasattva which Purifies Obscurations
With oneself in an ordinary form
chiwor lama dorsem yermé pé
Above my head is the Lama, inseparable from Vajrasattva.
ku lé dütsi gyün bab drib jang gyur
From his body flows a stream of nectar that purifies all our negative karma, destructive emotions,
illnesses, destructive influences (negativity), and blockages due to digpa (negative
actions) and dripa (obscurations).
The Hundred Syllable Mantra
om benza sato samaya
Oṃ, the most excellent exclamation of praise,  Vajrasattva’s samaya:
manupalaya  benza sato
O Vajrasattva, protect the samaya
tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava
May you remain firm in me
sutokhayo mé bhava
Grant me complete satisfaction
supokhayo mé bhava
Grow within me (increase the positive within me)
anurakto mé bhava
Be loving towards me
sarva siddhi mé prayaccha
Grant me all the siddhis
sarva karma su tsa mé
Show me all the karmas (activities)
tsittam shreyang kuru
Make my mind good, virtuous and auspicious!
hung
Hūṃ! The heart essence, seed syllable of Vajrasattva
ha ha ha ha
Ha ha ha ha! Symbolizes the four immeasurables, the four empowerments,  the four joys, and the
four kāyas
ho
Ho! The exclamation of joy at this accomplishment
bhagavan  sarva tatagata
O blessed one, who embodies all the vajra tathāgatas
benza ma mé muntsa
Do not abandon me
benzi bhava
Grant me the realization of the vajra nature
maha samaya sato
O great Samayasattva
ah
Ā! Make me one with you
Recite the hundred syllable mantra visualizing the descending stream of purifying nectar.
The Six Syllable Mantra
om benza sato hung
oṃ vajra sattva hūṃ
Recite the six syllable mantra as much as possible.
To finish:
ö shyu daknang dang dré ro chik gyur
Lama Vajrasattva dissolves into light and becomes one with me.
Rest in meditation with Vajrasattva gathered into oneself.
2.5 The Swift Blessings of Uniting with the Mind of the Guru
rangnyi dorjé naljor dün kha ru
I am transformed into Vajrayoginī; in the sky before me
tsawé lama pemé kur shyeng gyur
My tsawé lama appears in the form of Guru Padmasambhava.
Four Line Invocation Prayer
dü sum sangye malü düpé ku
The embodiment of all the buddhas, past, present and future,
tsawé lama chok la solwa deb
Incomparable tsawé lama I pray to you.
di chi bardo sum du tukjé zung
In this life and in the next, and in the bardo states, guide me with compassion.
dü sum gyünché mepar jingyi lob
Grant me your blessings continuously at all times.
Vajra Guru Mantra
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āh hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Recite many times, one hundred, one thousand, and so forth.
Receiving the Siddhis and Dissolution
ku sung tuk kyi wang jin yongdzok tob
I am fully empowered with the blessings of body, speech and mind of Guru Rinpoche.
benza guru kaya waka tsitta siddhi hung
vajra guru kāya vaka citta siddhi hūṃ
Thus receive the Four Empowerments. To finish:
lama ö shyu rang tim yermé ngang
The Lama dissolves into light and becomes inseparable one with me.
riktong dön gyi lamé rang shyal ta
Recognize one's own rigpa as the absolute Lama.
Rest in meditation with the Guru absorbed into oneself.
2.6 The Transference of Consciousness (Phowa)
gönpo öpakmé la solwa deb
I pray to the protector Amitābha, the Buddha of Limitless Light,
zablam powa jongpar jingyi lob
By your blessings may I accomplish the profound path of phowa.
Recite many times to intensify the intention to transfer your consciousness.
2.7 The Generosity of Giving One's Body and Dedicating the Merit
dani lü dang longchö getsar ché
Now my body, my possessions, my merits and even their causes, all together
magyur dro la pangpa mepar tang
I surrender them to all beings with no remorse;
dro dön lab chen gekmé drubpar shok
May I provide great benefit for all beings without hindrance.
Thus, make fervent prayers of aspiration, etc.

This is a concise recitation of the preliminary practices by Jikdral Yeshe Dorje that clearly
elucidates the essential meaning and is intended for those who do not understand or are
unable to recite the extensive preliminary practices according to the New Treasure.

| Rigpa Translations