A Daily Practice of Vajraṇakhī
by Dudjom Rinpoché

namo, lama chok sum yidam lhar
Namo! In the guru, the Three Jewels, and the yidam deity,
güpé kyab chi khanyam dro
With the deepest devotion I take refuge.
lamé changchub chok tob chir
So that all beings, as limitless as the sky, may attain supreme, unsurpassed awakening,
dorjé dermo gompar gyi
I shall meditate on Vajraṇakhī, ‘Vajra Claw’.
Three times.
ying yé zungjuk hung yik bar
The union of basic space and wisdom is the blazing syllable hūṃ,
dé lé durtrö shyalyé su
From which, within an immense charnel ground,
daknyi lé kyi khandroma
I appear as the activity ḍākinī,
tingnak shyal chik chak nyipa
Dark blue in colour, with one face and two hands.
yepé raldri sam chö char
Her right hand wields a sword that cuts through thoughts,
yönpé dorjé purbu dril
And her left rolls a vajra-kīla, an indestructible dagger.
shyab nyigar tab dragek dzi
Her two legs, in the dancing posture, trample enemies and obstructors.
durtrö barwé ché nam dzok
Her body is adorned with charnel ground ornaments and
yeshe mé yi long na rol
She stands within an expanse of blazing wisdom fire.
tukkar nyi teng hung ting tar
In her heart upon a sun disk
ngak kyi trengwé korwa lé
Is hūṃ, dark blue and encircled by the mantra garland,
özer mé yi tsatsa trö
From which light radiates, shooting out sparks of flame,
nedön dikdrib tamché sek
That burn away all sickness, harmful influences, negativity and obstruction.
ku lé ku trö jikten gang
From her body emanate further forms that fill the universe completely;
sung gi drakngak druk tar drok
Her speech reverberates with thunderous wrathful mantras;
tuk ni drol dzé yeshe bar
And her mind is ablaze with liberating wisdom.
jema lha dang chepa dang
All sorcerous gods and spirits,
dü gek dra dang damsi tsok
All demons, obstructors, enemies and samaya corruptors are
purbü dab ching towé dung
Struck with the kīla, pounded with the hammer,
chakgyé nen ching lakpar gyur
Suppressed beneath the seal and thus completely annihilated!
om gha gha ghataya ghataya sarwa dushten benza dharoda ajna payati sarwa bighanen kaya waka
tsitta benza kili kilaya hung hung pé pé
oṃ gha gha ghātaya ghātaya sarvaduṣṭān vajradharodājñāpayati sarva vighnān kāya vāk cittaṃ vajrakīli
kīlaya hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ ||
At the end of the mantra recitation, continue with:
hung hung hung
With hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ everything dissolves.
pé pé pé
With phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ I rearise as the deity.
om ah hung
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ I am protected.
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
dorjé dermo drub gyur né
Attain the realization of Vajraṇakhī, and thereby
drowa chik kyang malüpa
Every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Reach her state of perfection too.

Jñāna extracted this from the supplementary practice of The Profound Long-Life Practice of the
Three Roots from the Sevenfold Profundity.1

| Translated by Stefan Mang, 2019.
↑ The Profound Long-Life Practice of the Three Roots from the Sevenfold Profundity or Zabdün
Tsasum Tse Zab (zab bdun rtsa gsum tshe zab) is a treasure revelation of Chokgyur Dechen
Lingpa (mchog gyur bde chen gling pa, 1829-1870).