A Daily Long-Life Practice of Amitāyus
by Dudjom Rinpoche

lama chimé gönpor kyab su chi
I take refuge in the guru, the immortal protector,
semchen döndu tsé yi rigdzin drub
For sentient beings, I shall attain the level of a vidyādhara with power over life.

ah, neyul womin dechen shyingkham ü
Ah. In the centre of this place of residence, the pure-land of great bliss,
pé dar rangsem hrih lé tsepakmé
Upon a lotus and moon, from the Hrīḥ of my own mind emerges Amitāyus, ‘Boundless Life’—
mar sal shyi dzum nyam shyak tsebum dzin
Bright red, smiling peacefully and holding a long-life vase in the gesture of equanimity.
longchö dzok ku jazer long du shyuk
He is in saṃbhogakāya form and sits amidst an expanse of rainbow-coloured rays of light.
tukkar nyidé ga'ü nangkhong su
At his heart within a locket formed by the sun and moon
hrih tar ngak kyi kor lé özer trö
Is a syllable Hrīḥ encircled by the mantra, from which rays of light shoot out
tenyö tsechü kün dü dak la tim
To collect the vital essence of the animate and inanimate world, which returns and dissolves
into me,
mi shik chimé dorjé ku drub gyur
And I thereby accomplish the deathless, indestructible vajra-kāya.
om amarani dziwentayé soha
oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā
Recite the mantra as much as possible. Then at the end continue with:
kyegak nyimé jalü dorjé ku
The rainbow-body vajra-kāya, beyond the duality of arising and ceasing,
khakhyab drowa drenpé dön la juk
Acts in order to guide beings who pervade throughout the whole of space.
gé di dümin chiwé jikpa shyi
Through the virtue of this, may all fears of untimely death be pacified,
tsewang tashi nangwé tak khyab shok
And may the light of longevity and auspiciousness stream forth for evermore.

Jigdral Yeshe Dorje wrote this for the personal daily practice of Jigme-la, son of the noble
Sampho family.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "tshe sgrub rgyun khyer" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes
rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 212

Version: 1.3-20211222