A Daily Practice of Lama Sangdü
by Dudjom Rinpoche

Begin by taking refuge and arousing bodhicitta:
Taking Refuge
namo lama  deshek  düpé  ku
Namo! Guru, in your perfect form, you embody all the sugatas;
kön  chok  sum  gyi  rangshyin  la
Your nature is that of Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha.
dak  dang  dro  druk  semchen  nam
Until I and all beings of the six realms attain enlightenment,
chang  chub  bar  du  kyab  su  chi
I take refuge in you!
Arousing Bodhicitta
sem  kyé  drowa  kun  dön  du
To benefit all beings, I arouse the awakened mind of bodhicitta,
lama  sangyé  drup  né  ni
And once I have accomplished the enlightened state of the Guru,
gang  la  gang  dul  trinlé  kyi
By teaching each and every one according to their needs,
drowa  dralwar  dam  cha o
I shall liberate beings: this is my vow!
Visualization
tong  sal  ngang  lé  ké  chik  dren  dzok  su
Out of the state of emptiness and luminosity, perfect the very instant I think of it,
né  yul  dechen  barwé  podrang  ü
The whole environment is the blazing palace of great bliss. In its centre,
rang  nyi  ta  chok  yab  yum  kur  salwé
I visualize myself clearly as Hayagrīva, in union with Vajravārahī,
chiwor  lama  tö  treng  tsal  yab  yum
Above the crown of my head sits Tötreng Tsal, in union with his consort.
rang  tsal  ku  nga  tsen  gyé  trin  pung  tro
As his own natural display, he sends out clouds of emanations—of his five enlightened forms
and eight manifestations;
chok  shyir  rik  shyi  pawo  yab  yum  dang
In the four directions preside the ḍākas of the four families with their consorts,
chi  rol  khandro  chö  kyong  trin  pung  trik
And all around, gather throngs of ḍākinīs and dharmapālas.
dö né  dam  yé  yermé  ngowor  sal
Visualize samayasattva and jñānasattva as primordially, and inseparably, one.
Mantra Recitation
nyen  dü  lama  chiwor  gom
During the approach phase, I visualize the Guru at the crown of my head.
sol  dep  tsul  du  dzap  di  da
And recite this mantra as a prayer:
om  ah  hung  vajra  guru  padma  siddhi  hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
drup  dü  lama  nying  gar  gom
During the accomplishment phase, I visualize the Guru in my heart.
chö  tö  tsul  du  dzap  di  da
And recite this mantra as an offering and praise:
om  ah  hung  vajra  guru  padma  tötreng  tsal  vajra  samaya  dza  siddhi  pala  hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma tötreng tsal vajra samaya ja siddhi pāla hūṃ
lé  jor  lama  rang  sal  dap
During the activity phase, I visualize myself in the form of the Guru.
trinlé  lhundrup  tsul  du  dzap  di  da
And recite this mantra as a means of spontaneously accomplishing enlightened activity:
om  ah  hung  vajra  guru  padma  tötreng  tsal  vajra  samaya  dza  siddhi  pala  hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma tötreng tsal vajra samaya ja siddhi pāla hūṃ
hrih  ma  harinisa  ratsa  hrih  ya  tsitta  hring  hring  dza  sarwa  siddhi  shanting  pushting
washam  maraya  phat
hrīḥ ma ha ri ni sa raca hrīḥ ya citta hriṃ hrīṃ jaḥ sarva siddhi śāntiṃ puṣṭim vāśaṃ māraya
phaṭ

To conclude, rest in a state beyond all concepts, and dedicate the merit.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2003. First published on Lotsawa House, 2019.

Version: 1.2-20211005