A Daily Practice of Ucchuṣma
by Dudjom Rinpoche

namo
Namo!
lama chok sum yidam lhar
In the lama, the Three Jewels and the yidam deity
güpé kyab chi kha nyam dro
With devotion, I take refuge. So that all beings, as infinite as space,
lamé chang chub chok tob chir
May attain supreme, unsurpassable awakening,
mewa tsekpa gompar gyi
I shall meditate on Ucchuṣma.
three times
tongpé ngang lé kechik gi
From the state of emptiness, instantly,
natsok pé nyi den tengdu
Upon lotus and sun disc seats,
rangnyi tro chen metsek ni
I appear as the great wrathful Ucchuṣma,
ting nak özer kün trowa
Dark blue in colour and emanating rays of light,
chak nyi tukkar dikdzub dzé
With two hands at my heart displaying the threatening mudrā,
trowö chaluk dzokpar gom
And complete with all the attributes of a wrathful heruka.
né sum yigé trodu lé
Through the emanation and re-absorption of syllables at my three centres,
shyitrö tsok kün chendrang tim
All the peaceful and wrathful ones are invited and dissolve into me.
tukkar pé nyir hung ting tar
At my heart upon a lotus and sun disc is a blue syllable hūṃ,
dé ngak galmé khorlo shyin
Surrounded by the mantra, whirling like a blazing firebrand.
mé yi tsatsa truk ching tro
As I recite the mantra, sparks of flame flicker and shoot out
nöjé nyamchak kün sek gyur
To burn away completely all harm and breakages of samaya.
om bhurkur maha pranaya bhurtsi bhurki bimalé utsukma krodha radza hung pé
oṃ bhur kur mahāprāṇāya bhur ci bhur ki vimale ucchuṣma krodharāja hūṃ phaṭ
For major defilements recite the mantra one hundred times. For average defilements recite it
fifty times, and for minor defilements recite it twenty-one times. And blow into your nostrils.
nö chü rang tim rang nyi kyang
The outer and inner world dissolves into me,
ösal nyukmé ngang du yel
And I too fade into the genuine state of clear light.
lar yang trogyal kur shar té
Then again, I arise in the form of the King of Wrath,
mi tün chok kun sungwar gyur
To protect against all adversity.
gewa di yi nyur du dak
Through this merit, may I swiftly
mewa tsekpa drub gyur né
Accomplish Ucchuṣma,
drowa chik kyang ma lüpa
And bring every other being too
dé yi sa la göpar shok
To that level of realisation.
Dedicate the virtue, and recite verses of auspiciousness.

By Jñāna.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2015. Revised 2019.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "sme brtsegs rgyun khyer" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes
rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 249–250

Version: 2.2-20211217