A Joyful Chariot for the Fortunate
An Aspiration to Travel to the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory
by Dudjom Rinpoche

rangnang dakpa dechen dorjé ying
Within pure personal perception, basic space of indestructible great bliss,
lhündrub womin gyutrul drawé gar
Is the spontaneously perfected Akaniṣṭha, the web of magical illusion’s display,
rabjam gyalwé shyingkham gyatsö pul
The most sublime amongst an ocean of myriad buddha fields—
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
yi ong pema ragé riwang tser
On the peak of this king of mountains, made of enticing ruby,
norbü ba gam tsekpé podrang ni
Rises a palace built of precious jewels—
puljung ngotsar köpé dzepachen
Exquisite, marvellously arranged, so beautiful to behold.
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
tsenden naktsal trikpé do ra ru
In its sandalwood forest sanctuary,
yu yi pang jong natsok chukyé shyin
Is a turquoise meadow, like so many lotuses,
gesar dzum dang göpé langtso ngom
Where flowers show off their youth, laughing with radiant smiles,
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
gabur pö chü sherwé dütsi lung
Rivers of flowing nectar scented with camphor,
lhung lhung nyamgar bab ching khorwé dzing
Trickle down delightfully into swirling pools
shyönnü garkhen chiyang tsé shying gyu
Where youthful dancers swim about and play.
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
wang shyü gurkhyim trikpé dramik né
From the webbed array of a tent of rainbows above,
metok char zim babpé dul treng nang
A fine and gentle rain of flowers floats down
ging chen dewé gar gyi nampar tsé
Upon kiṃkaras1 at play in their blissful dance.
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
püntsok döpé yönten nam mangpö
Clouds of beautiful ḍākinīs gather, lavishly adorned,
künné dzé gur gyen jé khandrö trin
Carrying an abundance of varied sensual delights,
mi dzé chok kyi khorlö lar drepa
They fan out endlessly, across the full reach of sky.
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
rigdzin düpé tsok kyi dral ü na
In the centre of the gathered vidyādharas’ ranks,
pema jungné gyalwé wangpo yi
Resides Padmākara, the Lord of Victors,
zabsang sengé dra chen küntu drok
Forever proclaiming the great lion’s roar, secret and profound,
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
sangye kün gyi ngowo nga yin shyé
“I am the embodiment of all the Buddhas!” and so you are,
khyentsé yeshe tsungpa mepé tob
For the strength of your wisdom, insight, and love is unmatched,
mumé duljé kham dang nyampar juk
As you act in accord with the infinite characters of beings.
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
yönten gyatso pata yepé ter
Merely by recalling this treasury of qualities, endless as an ocean,
drenpa tsam gyi shying der ukjinpé
We are assured birth in your pure realm,
ngotsar trinlé khorlö zijin chen
A splendorous maṇḍala of marvellous, awakened activity.
zangdok pal gyi riwor kyewar shok
May we be born on this Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory!
khachö pema ö dzé drongkhyer du
Let us wait no more but travel right now,
danta nyi du tsen tab drö né kyang
To the heavenly paradise of beautiful Lotus Light,
dön nyi yishyin drubpé namtar tsul
Where we accomplish the wish-fulfilling twofold benefit, just as you have—
nyammé guru khyö dang tsungpar shok
O Peerless Guru, may we become equal to you!

When the noble child Dekyong Yeshé Wangpo2 was leaving this world, her old father Jikdral Yeshé
Dorjé, with a heart filled with sadness and a mind in great anguish, composed this aspiration
prayer for her safe journey to the Paradise of Lotus Light. May goodness abound!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. Dedicated to the memory of Lodi Gyari Rinpoche, whose unswerving
devotion to Guru Rinpoche will continue to inspire us and guide us on the path.
May we meet again on the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory.
↑ Kiṃkaras (ging chen) are deities who attend to the main deities in some maṇḍalas. They appear
as skeletons who beat a drum, wear a triangular pennant pinned in the middle of their
hair, and ear ornaments that look like colourful fans.↑ Dekyong Yeshe Wangmo (Bde skyong ye
shes wang mo) was the first daughter of Dudjom Rinpoche and Sangyum Rigzin Wangmo. She passed
away when she was only a baby.