A Prayer to Recognize My Own Faults and Keep in Mind the Objects of Refuge
by Dudjom Rinpoche

I pay homage to the guru!
kalzang shying gi dren chok shakyé gyal
Śākyamuni, Victorious One, Supreme Guide of the realm for this fortunate aeon,
gyalsé changsem drodul pakpé tsok
Sons of the Victorious one, assembly of noble bodhisattvas who tame sentient beings,
nyik drö kyobpa tsungmé guru jé
Lord guru, matchless saviour of beings in the dark age,
tsa sum chökyong damchen tsok ché la
The three roots and oath-bound dharma guardians—
tsechik nying né drenpé dung yü kyi
Again and again, I ask from my heart, recalling you with longing and one-pointed mind—
yangyang soldeb tukdam kul lak na
Please turn your attention toward me.
tsewé jezung tokmé tukjé tü
Take hold of me with your loving-kindness and with the power of your unhindered compassion
samdön chö shyin drubpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessings that my thoughts and aims be carried out in accord with Dharma.
ngön lé ma shyen milü rinchen tob
Through past acts, not without merit, I have obtained this precious human birth.
sönam ma chung dampé chö dang jal
Through past merit, not slight, I have met the sublime Dharma.
lamé jezung wang jin damngak tob
Accepted by the guru, I was able to obtain empowerments, blessings, and the essential instructions—
norbu rang lak nyepé dü jung yang
All this wealth I now hold in my hands.
chol chung pé'u drawé rangsem di
But my mind, like a babbling monkey, falls under the sway
namyeng lu dri gongpö wang song né
Of the enticing, deceptive demon of distraction
rang nor rang dak nyamlen manü té
And I can not take advantage of the wealth that is my own.
daljor damngak chab chik chüzö shor
Thus, this free, well-favoured human birth and the lama’s teaching are both wasted.
danta dön chen gak la tuk nyé dü
Now I am at a turning point:
shyü tsé tob tsé nawö drung tam dra
All the teachings that I have asked for, all I have received, are like a myth.
lü di chö zuk chöpa yin lom yang
My body has the appearance of a practitioner, and I have a practitioner’s conceit;
sem di yangdak chöpé jema zin
My mind can not fathom the true teachings.
lha chö tachi mi chö dri ma gö
Lacking even a trace of common Dharma, much less holy Dharma,
mi chö tsangma chudruk goyul tsam
The sixteen rules for ordinary social behaviour are just something that I have heard of.
rang tö chö ngen ché la ngotsa dral
Seeing myself behave badly, I am without shame; seen by others, I am unembarrassed;
shyen tö trel shyung chi tak drawé juk
My bond to the teachings is short as a marmot’s tail.
lha chö gé chu yangdak ngo ma tok
Unable to practice properly true Dharma’s ten virtuous deeds,
tönpa chik gi ten la chok shyen gyi
Harbouring sectarian bias toward the one Buddha’s teachings, I slander the teachings and great
beings and gather up bad karma.
chö dang dampar kurdeb lé ngen sak
Based on Dharma I carry a great weight of evil deeds.
chö la ten né dikpé khur chen khyer
The more teaching I’ve received, the more my vision of myself inflates,
töpa ché shyin rangtong ngagyal ché
Though intellectual analyses can not penetrate the deep meaning of the teachings.
sampé ché döngowé ting ma pok
With conceit, I think, “I keep the pratimokṣa disciplines!”
sotar tsultrim sungwar lom na yang
But the four virtuous dharma practices1 have been lost without a trace.
gejong chö shyi garsong chamé tor
With conceit, I think, “I posses the precious bodhisattva training!”
changsem lab norden par lom na yang
But the four immeasurables are just like pictures of a lamp.
tsemé nam shyi rimö marmé dra
With conceit, I think, “I keep the secret mantrayāna samayas!”
sang ngak damtsik sungwar lom na yang
But, not respecting the first root transgression, I become careless about all the rest.
tsa tung dangpor tsimé nang chung shor
I can glibly explain the four thoughts that turn the mind to Dharma,
lo dok nam shyi kha né shé shé kyang
But my attachment to phenomena shows that my own mind has not truly changed.
dön la dok min dir nang shyenpé tön
Though I rely on a teacher, respect and devotion slowly ebb away;
lama ten shyin mögü rimgyi dri
Instead of having pure perception, I have wrong views, and see the guru as my equal.
daknang tsab su nyam drok lokpar tong
Love and respect toward my vajra-friends weakens;
dorjé pün la tsedung kur sem shyen
Unable to endure a few harsh words, I complain constantly.
tsik ngen tsam yang mizé mö charbeb
Lacking thorough training in bodhicitta,
dro druk pamar shepé jam nyingjé
The love and compassion that comes about from seeing all beings of the six realms as my parents
disappears like mist.
changsem tingné ma jong nabün shyin
Although I act as if I practice the paths of generation and completion,
kyedzok lam la nyamlen jé khul kyang
I cannot even cope with ordinary endless delusion.
tamal trul jam di la lak ma nyé
I recognize that the ultimate teaching of sūtra and tantra is emptiness,
do ngak chö puk tongnyi ngoshé kyang
But cannot make use of that recognition; my mind-stream stays hard as horn.
tong go ma chö ranggyü ra tar gyong
When I practice remaining in mind’s true condition
neluk gom gyi rang tsuk mazinpar
I am without stability, yet I mouth off about the profound view and toss cause and effect to
the winds.
khakhyer tawé gyundré lung la kur
On the outside—I can give a show of good behaviour;
chitar tsul chö chölam zang na yang
On the inside—desire, attachment, greed rage like fire.
nang du chak sé dö ngam mé tar bar
Though my body remains in isolated mountain retreat,
lü di wenpé ri la né khul kyang
My mind wanders into town constantly, night and day.
sem di nyintsen barmé drong yul drim
Without enjoying a real measure of certainty in myself,
rang go tönpé ding tsema long shyin
Thinking to act for other’s benefit is just a fairytale.
shyen go dönpé samjor jipé drung
Although it is impossible that the Three Jewels betray me,
könchok tukjé lu mi si kyang
Due to my weak devotion, I fear I will betray myself.
mögü shyenpé rang gi rang lü dok
Thus, although I am without the wrong view
ditar dampé chö dang lama la
Of not believing in the guru and the sacred dharma,
yi machepé lokta mé mö kyang
In these bad times we sentient beings are busily perfecting our bad karma,
dü ngen semchen lé ngen kha ma gang
Knowing, heedlessly, falling under the sway of unawareness;
go shyin sheshyin bakmé wang du shor
Failing to maintain mindfulness, we suffer a great loss.
dren sheja rama tong gyong chen dab
Right now, when I examine myself, I see
danta rang lö rang la ché nyinmo
That everything I have done has only added on to my confusion,
jé tsé tamché trulpé kha nön song
That all my thinking has been stained by the obscuring emotions and by grasping.
sam tsé tamché nyönmong dzinpar song
Not seeing that even my virtuous acts are polluted with negativities
gewa ang dikpé ma lemé tongwé
Where else is there to end up but in the lower realms?
tartuk drosa ngensong lé shyen chi
As for the way I behave and what I’ve done,
detar rang gi chö tsulja shyak nam
Bringing these to mind, I am sickened.
dren né rang gi rang la yiché ching
Looking to others, I am only more discouraged;
shyen la té kyang yimuk kha nön lé
There are no friends to benefit and ease my mind.
pen drok lo bak pab khen su ma jung
If I can not take care of myself now,
dani rang go rang gi ma tön na
Others can not give me refuge when hope is exhausted
shinjé ponyé lak tu tsü zin dü
And I am in the hands of the messengers of the Lord of Death.
shyenpa sü kyang kyobpé rewa zé
To wait for a rescue that can never come,
ré tong gukpé lüpa ma tsor ram
Is not that self-deception?
dena rang kyön ngö zin nonggyö kyi
Thus, with shame and remorse recognizing my own errors,
chö gal nyetung nyamchak chichi pa
Whatever offences against Dharma have occurred, whatever samaya transgressions and violations,
mi chab mi bé yeshe chenden drung
I will not try to conceal from those with wisdom vision.
nying né shak so tsewé zö shyé la
From the bottom of my heart, I confess; with your compassion, please endure me.
lam lok yangsé jik lé kyab né kyang
Be my refuge from the danger of the precipitous, errant path;
yangdak tarlam zinpar ukyung sol
Grant the deliverance of finding the perfect, liberating path.
jé jé drub drub mitsé kyal na yang
My whole life has been spent practicing this and practicing that
dönnying lak tu lönpa chik ma jung
With nothing in my hands to show for it, no attainment.
dani kün shé chik duk lamwor né
From now on, avoiding the miserable path of knowing much,
chik shé kün drollam la chi mi juk
And missing the one thing I need why not go on the path of knowing the one thing that frees
all?
mi lu ngepé ré tö chikchok gön
Certain, unfailing hope, sole, supreme Lord upon whom I rely,
tsawé lama kyabné kündü la
Root guru who combines all refuges in one,
tsechik güpé solwa deb lak na
I supplicate you with devotion and one-pointed mind;
tukjé zik shik kyab chok drinchen jé
Supreme refuge, lord of greatest kindness, take hold of me with your compassion.
rang kyön rang gi tongwar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing that I be able to see my own faults.
shyen kyön ta dö mepar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I have no wish to see the faults of others.
sam ngen duktsub shyiwar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing evil, cruel, and vicious thoughts be pacified.
sam zang khong né charwar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing wholesome thoughts arise deep from within.
dö chung chok shé denpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing desire may lessen and contentment increase.
namchi chamé drenpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I remember the uncertainty of the time of death.
chi dü lo lhakmé par jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I be unconcerned at the time of death.
chö la yiché kyewar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I develop trust in Dharma.
daknang chokmé jongpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I practice impartial pure perception.
chömin mögü kyewar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I develop unfabricated devotion and respect.
longmé lona tungwar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I persevere, seeing that I have so little time left.
lo puk chö la té nü jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I be able to establish Dharma as my ultimate innermost goal.
chö puk drub la tsön nü jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I persevere in practice, the ultimate goal of the Dharma.
drub puk ranggyü drolwar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I free my mind-stream the innermost practice.
drub la barché mepar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I have no obstacles to practice
drub dré nyurdu minpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing the fruit of my practice may ripen quickly.
dreltsé dön dang denpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing all conduct with those with whom I have a karmic link may be meaningful.
redok nyidzin shyikpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing the duality of hope and fear be extinguished.
nyimé yeshe tongwar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I see non-dual wakefulness.
yeshe rang ngoshepar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I recognize my own innate wakefulness.
rang tok tsensa zinpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I hold the dharmakāya citadel.
tsolmé ding chen tobpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing I gain the great effortless certainty.
yé né yeshe dorjé tsön chen gyi
By means of the great weapon, Indestructible primordial wakeful awareness,
khordé tong sok dü chik ché né kyang
May the void life-force of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa both be severed, at once.
ma gak dechen nyemmé gatön la
Then, in the unending great bliss of Vajragarvā’s2 feast
dudral mepar chöpé tak tsen shok
May we always enjoy the activity that is beyond joining and parting.
nyam dal long na dukngal ming tsammé
In the pervasive space of evenness, even the word “suffering” does not exist—
dena dewa tsol khen su shyik chi
So who ought to be striving for happiness?
deduk ronyam dzinmé rangdrol gyi
In the kingdom of Samantabhadra happiness and suffering are of one taste; without grasping,
they liberate of themselves.
kunzang gyalsi tsé dir tobpar shok
May I attain Samantabhadra’s kingdom in this very life!
This is a supplication, confession of faults, and an aspiration-prayer combined in one. One
night early in Water-Pig year (1983), my wisdom consort Rigdzin Wangmo3 had a dream in which
appeared a female companion who had often appeared in her dreams. The girl said, “Now you
should ask Rinpoche to write a supplication prayer. Alright?” and left. Later, on the tenth
of the waxing moon, she appeared again, saying, “Why haven’t you asked about the writing
of that prayer?”
That next morning, when we were discussing the dreams and the prayer, I said, “There are already
plenty of supplication prayers, but not enough people who do them.” Rigdzin Wangmo insisted,
saying, “No matter whether it’s short or long, you must write this supplication.”
Then I thought, “These days there is danger from disease, war, and famine. In order to protect
people from these dangers, I should write a prayer reminding the Compassionate Ones of
their vows to help beings.” But although I was thinking of writing one, due to the distraction
of many events, I didn’t have the chance.
Once again, on the evening of the 10th, the girl appeared, as before. She said in the dream,
“Don’t neglect the prayer that I asked for before. There is a great need for it!” So, I thought
to write it on the 15th of the same month. On the night of the 14th, I prayed with
one-pointed mind to Guru Rinpoche, asking for his blessing in order to compose the prayer,
making this aspiration, I went to sleep.
The next morning at dawn, in my own dream, I was at the head of a large hall like temple. Out
of nowhere a young white man appeared in white clothes, with long hair spread out over his
shoulders, holding a pair of cymbals. he rolled the cymbals, making a lovely sound, and
danced toward me, spiralling closer and closer, in circles toward the right, dancing as do
the Kiṃkaras. He said:
“If you want to establish the teachings, make them firm in your mind.
In the depths of mind, you will find buddhahood.
If you wish to visit buddha-fields, purify ordinary deluded attachment.
The perfect, excellent buddha-field is near at hand.
Develop diligence to practice the essence of the teachings.
Without, who can gain the siddhi?
It is hard to see one’s own faults.
So, pointing them out to oneself is a crucial instruction.
In the end, when faults are, one by one, removed
Enlightened qualities increase and shine forth.”

At the end of this poem, he rolled the cymbals and then crashed them together, and I awoke.
After I woke up, I did not forget what he had said, and I understood it to have been advice
on practicing what to accept and what to reject. I was regretful that, although I had actually
seen the face of my only father guru, I had not recognized him. I, Jigdral Yeshé Dorjé,
old father of the Nyingma School, wrote this from my own experience. May it be of benefit.
Sarvadā Maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Bhakha Tulku and Constance Wilkinson, Boudhnath, Nepal, 1989.
↑ The four virtuous dharma practices (dge sbyong chos bzhi) are: 1) not returning verbal abuse;
2) not returning physical abuse; 3) not returning anger for anger; and 4) not returning
provocation even though one has been provoked.↑ Vajragarvā (Rdo rje snyems ma) is the consort
of Vajrasattva.↑ Rigdzin Wangmo (rig ‘dzin dbang mo, 1925?–2014).