Concise Consecration Ritual
by Dudjom Rinpoche Jikdral Yeshe Dorje

Eliminate obstacle-makers from the representation with:
hung hung hung
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
Cleanse with:
om sarva tathagata abhishekate samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva-tathāgata-abhiṣekate samaya-śrīye hūṃ
Purify with:
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
Invite the deities with:
tongpé ngang lé ku ten nampar nang dzé
From within the state of emptiness, the representation of enlightened body is visualized as
Vairocana,
sung ten nangwa tayé
That of enlightened speech as Amitāyus,
tuk ten dorjé mi kyöpar salwé tukka né özer trö
And that of enlightened mind as Vajra-Akṣobhya. From their hearts radiates light,
womin gyi shying né yeshepa benza samadza
Which invites the wisdom deities from the pure realm of The Unsurpassed.1 Vajra samāja!
Dissolve the wisdom deities with:
dza hung bam ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
ten gyi né sum du om ah hung salwa lé ö tröpé dorjé sum gyi lhatsok chendrang té timpé ku sung
tuk dang yermé du gyur
Clearly visualize oṃ āḥ hūṃ in the three places of the representations. Light radiates out and
invites the deities of the three vajras. They dissolve and become indivisible from the
enlightened body, speech and mind of the representations.
lar yang tukké ö kyi wanglha chendrang pé wangkur
Once again, from their hearts radiates light that invites the empowerment deities, who then
grant the empowerment.
drima nga jang té yeshe nga ngön du jé
The five stains are purified and the five primordial wisdoms are actualized.
chu lhak chiwor tenpa lé rang rikdak por gyurpé rik ngé u gyenpar gyur
The remaining water flows to the crown of my head and is stabilised. I become the Lord of the
Families adorned with a crown of the five families.
Open the eyes with:
om jnana tsakshu prabeshaya pé
oṃ jñāna-cakṣu-praveśāya phaṭ
om a hung soha
oṃ āḥ hūṃ svāhā
Then, while making the sound of a vajra finger snap:
kyepé lhatsok yongsu gyurpa ten sosö nampar gyur
The deities previously generated now transform into the forms of the representations.
Make offering with:
om sarva tathagata maha pudza pratitsa ho
oṃ sarva-tathāgata-mahāpūja pratīccha hoḥ
Offer praise with:
namo purushaya ho
oṃ puruṣāya hoḥ
om supratita benza yé soha
oṃ supratiṣṭha-vajraye svāhā
om yé dharma hetu prabhava hetun teshan tatagato hyavadat | teshan tsa yo nirodha evam vadi
maha shramana soha
oṃ ye dharmā hetuprabhavā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat | teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhā ||
And toss the blessed flowers. Then recite the following:
om, dir ni ten dang lhenchik tu
Oṃ! Remain here, one with these images and objects,
khorwa si du shyuk né kyang
For the benefit of beings;
nemé tsé dang wangchuk dang
Grant us freedom from illness, and grant us long life, power and prosperity, and
chok nam lekpar tsal du sol
Make everything supremely auspicious—we pray!
Finally, recite elaborate prayers of auspiciousness, such as the following:
nyinmo delek tsen delek
May the day be well, may the night be well,
nyimé kung yang delek shing
May the mid-hours bring happiness too,
nyin tsen tak tu delek pa
May the day and night be always well—
kön chok sum gyi deng dir tsol
Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha, grant this here and now!

palden lamé deng dir tsol
Glorious masters, grant this here and now!
yidam lha yi deng dir tsol
Yidam deities, grant this here and now!
chökyong sungmé deng dir tsol
Dharma protectors and guardians, grant this here and now!
shyi dak nam kyi deng dir tsol
Local deities, grant this here and now!

jungpo kang dak dir ni lhak gyur tam
May all the spirits gathered in this place—
sa am önté bar nang khö kyang rung
Be it on the earth, in the water, or in the sky—
kyé gu nam la tak tu jam ché ching
Always show goodwill and kindness to all beings,
nyin dang tsen du chö la chöpar shok
And practise Dharma day and night!

dir ni gyalwa dra gyal den kang gi
The victorious buddhas, conquerors of the enemies,
shin tu denpar sung shing dzün mepa
Only ever utter the truth and never what is false;
denpa dé kyang deng dir delek shok
Through this truth, may everything be virtuous and positive here and now!
deng kun jikpa ché lé tar gyur chik
And may we all be freed from every major fear!
deng dir naljorpa dak chak pönlop yön chö khor dang chepa tamché nyima dang dawa za dra chen
gyi nöpa lé drolwa shyin du dü dang pang cha barché mi tünpé chok tamché lé nampar gyal té
shin tu tashi par gyur chik
May everything be auspicious here and now, so that we yogins and yoginīs, and all those around
us, our teachers and our patrons, be freed from all the harms of solar and lunar eclipses,
and liberated from every form of destructive influence, obstacle, and adversity!
dzaya dzaya sudzaya
jaya jaya sujaya
This was written by Jñāna at the request of Gyatön.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2019, following the explanations of Khenpo Tashi Tseten. (Prayer of
auspiciousness courtesy of Rigpa Translations.)
↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha