Condensed Daily Practice of The Heart Essence of the Sublime Lady of Immortality
by Dudjom Rinpoche

Oṃ svasti!
If you wish to engage in the profound practice of the Sublime Lady who bestows long-life, do
as follows:
Preliminaries
namo, kyabné kundü jetsünmar
Namo! Sublime Lady, embodiment of all sources of refuge,
changchub bardu dak kyab chi
Until I attain awakening I take refuge in you.
dro kun dukngal lé drol chir
In order to liberate all wandering beings from suffering,
chimé drupar semkyé do
By attaining immortality, I arouse bodhicitta.
Main Practice
a, chö nam mimik tongpé ngang
Aḥ! All phenomena are empty, beyond all concepts.
zungjuk ösal nyingjé tsal
Union1 is the all-illuminating compassion.
rigpa tam yikkar po shar
Through its power, awareness arises as the white syllable tāṃ.
dé lé ö trö dön nyi jé
From tāṃ, light emanates and accomplishes the two aims.2
tsur dü yong gyur kechik gi
As the light gathers back, instantaneously
rangnyi yishyin khorlo ni
I transform into Cintāmaṇicakrā, Wish-Fulfilling Wheel,
drimé yi ong tön dé dang
Pristine, beautiful and lustrous like the autumn moon.
chak yé chok jin yönpa ni
Her right hand displays the mudrā of supreme generosity,
könchok sum tsön kyab jin gyé
Her left hand, extended in the mudrā of granting protection,
utpalar né tsebum nam
Holds an utpala flower on which rests a vase of longevity.
shyi dzum yeshe chen dünden
Peaceful, smiling, with seven eyes of wisdom,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
She is adorned with silks and jewelled ornaments and
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung gi
Seated cross-legged in vajra posture
pema dawé den la shyuk
On a lotus and moon-disc seat.
rang ö tab chok gar gyi wang
Her natural radiance is the supreme skilful means, Narteśvara, Lord of Dance,
pema tsebum nampé tril
Holding a lotus flower and a vase of longevity and embracing her.
né sum dorjé dru sum lé
From the syllables of the three vajras at the three places
ö trö yeshe chendrang gyur
Light shoots forth and invites the jñānasattvas.
benza sa ma dza
Vajra-samājaḥ |
dza hung bam ho nyimé gyur
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ — they merge indivisibly.
tukkar pé dar tsepakmé
In her heart upon a lotus and moon-disc seat resides Amitāyus, Buddha of Boundless Life.
dé yi tuk ü nyidé nang
In his heart within a sun and moon chest,
tam tar ngak kyi trengwé kor
Is the syllable tāṃ encircled by the mantra garland.
dé lé özer ponyamo
From it, light streams out filled with
pakma nampar gyalmé trin
Infinite cloud-like noble Vijayā goddesses, like dust in sunbeams.
drangmé nyizer dul tar trö
They draw in all the vital essence
tenyö tsechü dangma kün
Of the animate and inanimate universe,
özer dütsi nampar dü
In the form of the luminous elixir of immortality.
dak tim chimé ku drub gyur
It absorbs into me and accomplishes the immortal body.
om taré tutaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā |
Recite this as the main mantra.
om taré tutaré turé hrih droom benza jnana a yu khé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hrīḥ bhrūṃ vajra-jñānāyuṣe svāhā |
Then, recite this mantra for a little while.
Feast Offering3
In between sessions, if you wish to supplement your practice and offer a feast, do as follows:
ram yam kham | om hung tram hrih ah | ha ho hrih
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ | oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ ha ho hrīḥ |
hrih, ku sum shyingkham rabjam né
Hrīḥ! From the infinite three-kāya buddha-fields,
jetsün khorwa droldzé yum
Sublime Mother, who liberates beings from saṃsāra,
tsa sum chösung gyatsor ché
Surrounded by an ocean of deities of the three roots and dharmapālas,
tsok kyi duwar chendren shek
Approach—we invite you to this feast gathering.
sarva samaya dza dza
sarva-samājaḥ jaḥ |
om ah hung ho, rangjung bendza nangwa nö
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ hoḥ! Within the feast receptacle—the naturally-arisen bhāṇḍa,
tsakhor ying kyi kapalar
The kapāla—the natural condition of the channels and cakras,
zatung si chü changchub sem
Are arranged bodhicitta—food, drink, and the essences of existence—
rigpa rangsal tsoktor sham
And the feast bali—self-illuminating awareness.
chi nang sangwa lamepé
Please accept these outer, inner, secret and unsurpassed
tsok kyi chöpa shyé su sol
Feast offerings.
naljor dakchak khor ché kyi
We practitioners and those around us
sang sum damtsik nyampa shak
Confess all breakages of samaya related to the three secrets.
dü shyi barché ying su drol
Liberate all obstacles—the four māras—into the expanse of reality!
ku sung tuk kyi tsewang tsol
Grant us the empowerment of longevity of the awakened body, speech and mind!
samaya pentsa kama mahasukha jnana dhatu ganatsakra pudza ho
samaya-pañca-kāma-mahā-sukha-jñāna-dhātu-gaṇcakra-pūjā hoḥ |
hrih pem, pawo khandro shyingkyong tsok
Hrīḥ pheṃ! Hosts of ḍākas, ḍākinīs and kṣetrapālas,
lhakmé torma di shyé la
Accept this remainder bali,
barché kün sol tsé pal kyé
Dispel all obstacles, increase our life and vitality,
nam shyi trinlé nyur drub dzö
And swiftly carry out the four activities!
utsita ganatsakra pudza ho
ucchiṣṭa-gaṇacakra-pūjā hoḥ |
Conclusion
nöchü ö shyu rangnyi dang
The animate and inanimate universe dissolves into light and becomes one with me.
rang yang mimik trödral dang
I rest within simplicity, free from all concepts and elaborations.
pakmé sang sum chakgyar sé
I reawaken as the expression of the body, speech and mind of the Sublime Lady
chimé nyukmé ngowor gyur
Whose essence is innate immortality.
gé di dak gi tsok nyi dzok
Through this merit, may I complete the two accumulations,
nyurdu drolmé sa chok nyé
And swiftly reach the supreme accomplishment of Noble Tārā.
dro kün dribpa nyi pang té
May all beings conquer the two obscurations
chimé rigdzin tobpar shok
And reach the stages of the immortal vidyādharas.
gyal chok tsepakmé pé yum
Supreme, victorious consort of Amitāyus,
chimé ngepar terwa mo
Supreme bestower of immortality,
lhakpé lha chok chomden ma
Supreme amongst all exalted deities, Bhagavatī,
yishyin khorlö tashi shok
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, let everything be auspicious!

At the request of Lhacham Yudrön Drolkar, this daily practice has been arranged based on the
original text, by Jikdral Yeshé Dorjé. Āyu-siddhir-astu!

| Translated by Stefan Mang, 2018. Many thanks to Khenpo Tashi, Ryan Conlon and Han Kop for
kindly providing suggestions and clarifications. Edited by Peter Woods.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "'chi med 'phags ma'i snying thig gi rgyun khyer snying
por dril ba" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung
Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 177–180

Version 1.2-20211217
↑ Khenpo Tashi explained that, following the root text, union (zung ’jug) here refers to the
union of luminosity (’od gsal) and the space of suchness (de bzhin nyid dbyings). Thus this
line could be more fully read as The union of luminosity and the space of suchness is the
all-illuminating compassion.↑ That is the benefit for oneself and the benefit for others↑
For the following section Dudjom Rinpoche inserted a brief feast-offering composed by Jamgön
Kongtrul.