Daily Practice of Dorje Gotrab1
by Dudjom Rinpoche

rangnyi chakdor tingnak ngam
I am Vajrapāṇi, dark blue and ferocious,
dorjé drul shyak dzinpa yi
Brandishing a vajra and serpent lasso.
ku la durtrö palché dzok
Garbed in all the magnificent charnel ground accoutrements,
shyabzung pé nyir dortab dré
I stand with both legs in striding posture upon a lotus and sun,
yeshe mepung long du shyuk
Amidst an expanse of blazing wisdom fire.
ku lé mé khyung chakdik dang
From my body shoot out fiery garudas, iron scorpions,
pak nak lung mé tsen duk gi
Black boars, wind, flame and clouds of deadly poison,
ngé lang ser lung tsub tar trö
All of them bursting forth like a raging hailstorm
né rim dön gek lakpar gyur
To overcome illness, infectious disease, harmful influences and obstacles.
hung benza phat | om pema shawa ri phat | nenpar shik naga nen | teyatha | sarwa birita hana
hana | bendzéna raksha raksha soha
hūṃ vajra phaṭ | oṃ padma śavari phaṭ | nenpar shik | nāga nen | tadyathā | sarva virita | hana
hana | vajrena rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
Recite this as many times as possible. At the end of the session, consecrate dhāraṇī water,
drink it, and anoint yourself with it; or blow continuously into your nostrils. At the conclusion
of the session, consider that all sicknesses and harmful influences are destroyed
without leaving any trace. Their destruction reveals the natural state beyond protector and
protected, which you now maintain. Arise once again out of that state in the form of the
deity and augment the practice by dedicating the merit and reciting aspiration prayers and
verses of auspiciousness.

Jñāna extracted this as a daily practice from the Protective Wheel: Root Sādhana of the Extremely
Wrathful Black Hayagrīva.2

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2011. Revised 2020.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "rgyun khyer phyogs bsdebs nang gses le tshan don gnyis/"
in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung Lama,
1979–1985. Vol. 25: 263–264

Version: 2.1-20211217
↑ The original text is untitled; this title has been added by the translator.↑ rta mgrin yang
khros nag po’i rtsa sgrub srung ba’i ‘khor lo, a terma revealed by Dudjom Rinpoche.