Prayer to the Three Great Stūpas of Kathmandu
by Dudjom Rinpoche

nyewé tsando bel yul langrü por
In Upacchandoha1—the land of Nepal—on the summit of Ox-Horn,
depé gyal kun chinlap kudung jön
Appeared the blessings and relics of all the buddhas of times gone by;
ngotsar pakpa shingkün shyé drakpé
Renowned as the wondrous Pakpa Shingkün—2,
rangjung chörten chenpo la solwa dep
To this great, self-arisen stūpa, I pray!

tubwang gyal bu nying tob chen gyur tsé
When the Lord of Sages was the prince Mahāsattva, 'the Courageous',
takmo trepar rang gi ku lü jin
He sacrificed his own body to feed a hungry tigress;
né der chang chub chöpé ku dung jön
And on that very site the relics of enlightened action appeared—
changchub chörten chenpo la solwa dep
To this great stūpa of awakening, I pray!

jadzi mé shyeng bu shyi letro kyang
Built by a poultrywoman whose four sons sustained a karmic connection,
tukkyé ji shyin gangchen duljar zung
And, following their aspirations, took those from the Land of Snows as disciples;
mönlam yong drup jarung khashor drak
To this fulfiller of prayers, known as Jarung Khashor,3
tong drol chörten chenpo la solwa dep
This great stūpa which liberates upon sight, I pray!

dreltsé dönden chörten nam sum la
Through the merit of devotedly prostrating to, making offerings before, and circumambulating
güpé chak chö korwé sönam kyi
These three stūpas, which benefit all who come into contact with them,
dak shyen lé ngen dik drip yong jang né
May I and all others completely purify our negative karma, harmful actions and obscurations,
namdrol chang chub dré zang nyur top shok
And swiftly attain the excellent fruition of perfect liberation and enlightenment!

At the insistence of my own student, the diligent practitioner Rigzang Dorje, I, Jigdral Yeshe
Dorje, an upāsaka disciple of Śākyamuni, wrote this while making aspirations in the presence
of these supreme stūpas. May it be beneficial!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2016.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. 25 vols. Kalimpong:
Dupjung Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 62–63

Version: 1.5-20211222
↑ A name for Nepal as a pureland↑ 'Noble All-Trees'. On this name, see Hubert Decleer, “The
Tibetan Name of Svayambhu, 'Phags pa shing kun ('Sacred All-Trees'): What Does it Really Mean?”
in Light of the Valley: Renewing the Sacred Art and Traditions of Svayambhu, edited
by Tsering Palmo Gellek & Padma Dorje Maitland. Cazadero, CA: Dharma Publishing, pp. 241–72.↑
Meaning 'Permission Slipped Out of the [King's] Mouth'.