Spontaneous Song of the Genuine Nature
A Prayer of Calling the Guru from Afar
by Dudjom Rinpoche

ngowo döné mingyur trödral gyi shiluk
The essence, never changing, the natural, unelaborated condition,
kadak tingsal shyönnu bum ku ru shyukpa
Primordially pure, profoundly luminous—you who dwell in the youthful vase body,
chökü lama yeshe dorjé dé khyen no
Dharmakāya guru Yeshe Dorje, care for me!
tawé ding chen tobpar jingyi rang lob shik
Inspire me to gain the vast assurance of the view.

rangshyin magak zungjuk ösal gyi tsombu
The nature, unceasing, the maṇḍala gathering of the union of luminosity—
lhündrub ngepa nga den rolpa ru shyukpa
You who dwell in the spontaneously perfect display complete with the five certainties,
longkü lama dechen dorjé dé khyen no
Saṃbhogakāya guru Dechen Dorje, care for me!
gompé tsal chen dzokpar jingyi rang lob shik
Inspire me to perfect the great strength of meditation.

tukjé chok lhung dralwa ta drol gyi yeshe
The compassion, unlimited, wisdom that is free from extremes—
künkhyab riktong jenpé ngowo ru shyukpa
You who dwell in the essence of all-pervasive, naked awareness and emptiness,
tulkü lama drodul lingpa dé khyen no
Nirmāṇakāya guru Drodül Lingpa, care for me!
chöpé bok chen jongpar jingyi rang lob shik
Inspire me to master the great enhancement of action.

rangrig dömé shyi la pogyur ni mi duk
The primordial ground of self-awareness is unmoving and unchanging.
gang shar chökü tsal la zang ngen ni mi da
Whatever arises as the play of dharmakāya is neither good nor bad.
danté shepa sangye ngönsum du dukpé
Since this present awareness is the actual buddha,
guyang lodé lama nying ü né nyé jung
I find the guru of openness and contentment within my heart.

nyukmé sem di lamé rangshyin du tok tsé
When I realise that this genuine mind is the very nature of the guru,
dzin shyen soldeb chömé dukyü ni ma gö
There is no need for attached and grasping prayers or artificial complaints.
machö rigpa rangbab khayen du löpé
By relaxing in uncontrived awareness, the free and open natural state,
temé gang shar rangdrol jinlab dé tob jung
I obtain the blessing of the aimless self-liberation of whatever arises.

jepé chö kyi sangye drub dü ni mi da
Buddhahood is not attained by fabricated dharmas;
yichö löjé gom di lujé kyi dra ré
Speculative meditation, fabricated by the intellect, is the deceiving enemy.
dani dzintang shyikpé domé kyi nyönpa
Now clinging to style and manner is destroyed with crazy abandon.
junggyal cher nyal ngang la mitsé di kyeltong
Let this life be spent in this state of uninhibited naked ease.

gangtar jé kyang gao dzogchen gyi naljor
Joyful in all action, the Dzogchen yogi,
su dang drok kyang kyi do pejung gi bu gyü
Happy in any company, son of the lineage of Padmākara,
gön la drenda mé do terchen gyi lama
Lord who has no peer, great treasure-revealing guru,
chö la doda mé do khandro yi nyingtik
Dharma without equal, heart-essence of the ḍākinīs.

mong chen nying gi münpa rangmal du sang né
Having naturally purified the great delusion, the heart’s darkness,
ösal nyima dribmé khoryuk tu charwé
The radiant light of the unobscured sun continuously arises.
kalzang diko pa chik lama yi kudrin
This good fortune is the kindness of the guru, my only father and mother.
drin len khorta mé do lama rang dren no
Guru of unrepayable kindness, I only remember you!

At the request of my foremost vajra student, the tulku Jigme Chöying Norbu Dön Tamché Drubpé
Dé, this was spoken as delirious chatter by Jikdral Yeshe Dorje. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018 (with reference to an earlier translation by Ven. Lama Rinchen
Phuntsok, Arthur Mandelbaum and Ani Lodro Palmo).

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "gsol 'debs phyogs bsdebs nang gses le tshan brgya dang
brgyad/" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung
Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 34–36

Version: 1.3-20211210