The Prayer to Guru Rinpoche that Swiftly Removes Obstacles and Fulfils All Wishes
by Kyabjé Dudjom Rinpoche

emaho
Emaho: O wonder!
sangye kün gyi tukjé chikdüpa
O Guru Rinpoche! You are the compassion of all the buddhas in one,
lumé ten gyi kyab chik pema jung
Our only unfailing and constant refuge!
soldeb bu la tsewé nyur gong té
Quickly turn your love and attention towards us, your sons and daughters, and our prayers,
jinlab wang dang ngödrub dü dir tsol
Inspire us with your blessings, empowerments and siddhis—here and now!

khyé kyi namtar yönten kadrin tsé
Although we know the example of your life, your qualities and kindness
sangye shyen lé lhakpa shé mö kyang
Surpass those of any other buddha,
kyipé kabsu guru khyé ma dren
Yet in happy times, Guru, we do not remember you,
solwa tab kyang khakhyer tsam du tal
And our prayers are nothing more than so many meaningless words.

dadü nyikma nga dö güpé tsé
Now when the dark age’s intensifying decay oppresses us,
mindö dukngal tok bab jungwa na
And unwanted suffering strikes us without warning,
gön khyö nying khung rüpé tingné dren
Then we remember you, our protector, deep within our hearts.
dung yü odö bö dir tsewé gong
Turn your loving attention to this anguished plea of ours, our cry for help:

sa yo mé dra lung ten chu lok sok
Earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, drought, flood, and such—
jung truk chi yi barché chi ru sol
Remove these outer obstacles, nature’s disruptions, externally!
tsadrang lung tri beken dendü né
All kinds of illness—of heat and cold, wind, bile and phlegm—
du truk nang gi barché nang du sol
Remove these inner obstacles, physical disorders, internally!
duk nga ranggyü chakdang redok dü
The five poisons within our own minds: attachment and aggression, hope and fear—demonic forces,
sem truk sangwé barché ying su sol
Dissolve these secret obstacles, mental disturbances, into all-pervading space!

dzamling kyendro dukngal tso dol tsé
When immense suffering engulfs the world and beings,
shyider ukyung dzö chik pema jung
Turn it into happiness and peace, O Guru Rinpoche!
ta ü mak gi tsön kha dangwa na
When weapons of war threaten the whole face of the earth,
dü truk makpung dok chik pema jung
Turn back the armies that plunge this age into turmoil, O Guru Rinpoche!

drib dön né yam dukpé narwa na
When obscurations, malevolent spirits, diseases and epidemics plague us,
né dön tsené chö chik pema jung
Wipe out all this sickness, O Guru Rinpoche!
nöchü yang nyam ulpong dukngal tsé
When resources fail in the environment and amongst beings, bringing deprivation and suffering,
zé nor terkha ché shik pema jung
Reveal abundant food and riches, O Guru Rinpoche!

chö nor damdzé dro döndü bab tsé
When the time comes to help beings with a wealth of hidden teachings and sacred objects,
pa nor bu la trö chik pema jung
Hand over the father’s treasure to his heirs, O Guru Rinpoche!
bé yul wenné ri sul drimpé tsé
When roaming through mountain valleys, deserted places and hidden lands,
tünpé lam na drong shik pema jung
Lead us on the right path, O Guru Rinpoche!

ma rung chenzen tumpö tsé gyur na
When vicious wild animals attack us,
dukpé semchen trö chik pema jung
Drive off these ferocious creatures, O Guru Rinpoche!
jung shyi yowé gyulü jik nyé tsé
When the four elements become unbalanced, and threaten us with catastrophe,
jungwa rang sar shyi dzö pema jung
Harmonize the elements into their natural state, O Guru Rinpoche!

migö jak kün chompö tsewa na
When thugs, bandits and robbers assault us,
dukchen ngam sem lak dzö pema jung
Dispel the terror of such cruelty and greed, O Guru Rinpoche!
dang dra shemé tsönché zirwa na
When armed aggressors and killers torment us,
dorjé gur du tsü chik pema jung
Enclose us in a vajra tent, O Guru Rinpoche!

nam shyik tsé zé chiwé dü bab tsé
When this lifespan is exhausted and death comes,
dechen shying du drong shik pema jung
Lead us to the realm of Great Bliss, O Guru Rinpoche!
bardo trulnang dukngal charwé tsé
When the illusory experiences of the bardo arise as suffering,
trulpa rangdrol tong shik pema jung
Let the delusion be self-liberated, O Guru Rinpoche!

sipa lé kyi khorlor kha chol tsé
When we stray into the cycle of karmic existence,
tarpé lam tön dzö chik pema jung
Show us the path to liberation, O Guru Rinpoche!
di dang chima bardö kab küntu
Throughout this life, the next and the bardo state,
resa khyé le mé do pema jung
We have no one to rely on but you, O Guru Rinpoche!

dorna möden dak gi nying ü su
In short—rest your lotus feet in our hearts, your devoted followers,
khyö shyab pemo mindral tak kö dé
Always, without ever separating,
ma dak trulpé dukngal kün jang né
Completely purify the suffering of impurity and delusion,
ten dé tsensa zinpar jingyi lob
And inspire us, with your blessing, to reach the stronghold of everlasting happiness and peace!

This prayer is offered by Jikdral Yeshé Dorjé (Kyabjé Dudjom Rinpoche) for the peace and happiness
of the world, at a time when we are all afflicted both physically and mentally by all
kinds of outer and inner circumstances. For anyone who encounters this prayer, may it serve
as the cause to eliminate all the outer and inner obstacles they face and accomplish
their wishes and aspirations, just as they desire.

| Rigpa Translations, 2004. Revised 2016.

Version: 2.1-20210922