The Mountain Smoke Offering Arranged for Recitation
by Dudjom  Rinpoche

om svasti
Oṃ svasti.
The practice of Riwo Sangchö, the mengak, ‘secret instruction’, from Lhatsün Namkha Jikmé’s
‘Rigdzin Sokdrup’, as arranged by Dudjom Rinpoche.
Making an auspicious fire in a clean vessel or burner, burn aromatic woods, resins, medicinal
plants, the three white and three sweet substances, (yogurt, milk and butter; sugar, molasses
and honey) and all kinds of incense and powder—whatever you have available, and sprinkle
it with pure water.
1. Taking Refuge
om ah hung, kha nyam sishyi kyab kün nyingpö chü
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! The heart essence of all sources of refuge of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, who are as vast
as space,
wang drak rigdzin pema tötreng tsal
Powerful and wrathful vidyādhara, Padma Tötreng Tsal;
khyé kur nangsi gyalwé kyilkhor dzok
Within your body, all that appears and exists is the perfect buddha mandala:
dro kün si lé dral chir kyab su chi
In order to liberate all beings from saṃsāra, I take refuge in you!
3 times
2. Generating Bodhicitta
sang chok yeshe ösal tiklé shyir
In the ground of the luminous tiklé of supremely secret wisdom,
dro kün drib sum dak né ku dang sung
May the three obscurations of all beings be purified, and
tuk kyi tikler lhündrub nang shyi ngang
With the four visions spontaneously perfected in the tiklé of the wisdom body, speech and mind,
shyönnu bumkur drolwar semkyé do
May all beings be liberated into the youthful vase body! For this, I generate the heart and
mind of bodhicitta.
3 times
3. The Seven Aspects of Devotional Practice
shi rik machö nyukmar chaktsal shying
To the primordial, unaltered nature of rigpa, I pay homage!
ting ta dralwé ösal chöpa bul
The luminosity, transcending limits and dimensions, I offer!
khorwa nyangdé nyamnyi long du shak
In the expanse of sameness of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, I confess!
lodral chö zé chenpor jé yi rang
In the great exhaustion of all dharmas, beyond the ordinary mind, I rejoice!
lhündrub dzogpachenpö chökhor kor
Turn the wheel of the teachings of the spontaneously perfect Dzogpachenpo!
khorwa dong né trukpar solwa deb
Stir the depths of saṃsāra, I pray!
khor sum mik ta dralwé pata ngo
In the absolute state, free of subject, object or activity, I dedicate!
4. Self-Visualization
kadak chökü ying lé gakmé tsal
From the dharmakāya space of primordial purity, arising as its unobstructed play, is
pema tötreng kar mar shyön tsul dzé
Padma Tötreng Tsal, white with a tinge of red, in the full beauty of youth,
tsenpé zibar dorjé töpa nam
In dazzling splendour, with the major and minor marks, holding a vajra and skull cup,
dzé ji gyen dang chajé yongsu dzok
Majestic, complete with all ornaments and robes,
damyé nyimé gyal kün düpé zuk
Samayasattva and jñānasattva indivisible, his form is all the buddhas in one
khordé kün gyi chi pal chenpor gyur
The great embodiment of all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
108 times
5. Purification and Blessing of the Sang Offering
Purify the ingredients of the sang offering with:
ram yam kham
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
tongpé ngang lé sangdzé zakpa mepé yeshe kyi dütsi döyön gyatsö trinpung khakhyab tu trowar
gyur
Out of emptiness appear the ingredients of the sang offering, transformed into the wisdom nectar
free of any impurity, from which arises an ocean-like cloud of sensual stimulants, spreading
out to fill the whole of space.
Bless the sang offering with the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ and the sky-treasury mantra:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
3 times
nama sarva tatagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham udgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
namaḥ sarva tathāgatebhayo viśva mukhebhyaḥ sarvathākhaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gagana khaṃ svāhā
3 times
6. The Sang Offering
droom, rinchen natsok dangmé nö yang su
Bhrūṃ! In the vast lustrous vessel, made of the essence of various jewels,
jikten sipé dögu damtsik dzé
The samaya substances, all the desirable objects in worldly existence, are
dru sum yeshe dütsir jinlabpé
Transformed into the nectar of wisdom through the blessing of the three seed syllables oṃ āḥ
hūṃ,
nangsi chöpé dögur trikpa di
So that all that appears and exists becomes an offering of all that is desirable.
lama yidam daki chösung dang
This I offer to the lamas, yidams, ḍākinīs, dharmapālas and
chok chu gyalwé kyilkhor jinyé dang
All the mandalas of the buddhas of the ten directions,
dzamling shyidak rik druk lenchak drön
To the local deities of this world, beings of the six realms and the guests to whom I owe karmic
debts,
khyepar dak gi tsé trok sok ku shying
And especially to those who would steal my life and deplete my life force,
né tong barché tsompé jungpo dang
To the malicious jungpo demons who inflict sickness and obstacles,
milam taktsen ngen dang té ngen rik
Bad signs in dreams and all types of evil omens,
dé gyé marung chotrul dakpo dang
The eight classes of negative spirits, the masters of magical illusions,
zé dang né dang nor gyi lenchak chen
And those to whom I owe karmic debts of food, place and wealth,
drib dak nyodré poshin moshin dang
To forces that bring obscuration and madness, to the shades of men and women dead,
driwo terang drong sin dremo ché
To all the spirits, terangs, ghouls and female ghosts!
lenchak marpö mé la jal té sek
Now all my karmic debts are paid, burnt in the scarlet flames.
rang rang yi la gang dö dögü char
Whatever each one desires, may the objects of their desires rain down:
jisi namkha né kyi bar nyi du
For as far and as long as space exists,
döpé yönten zepa mepar ngo
I dedicate an inexhaustible amount of sensual stimulants!
dak gi dü sum sakpé dikdrib dang
May my negative actions and obscurations accumulated in past, present and future,
könchok dé shinkor la chepa nam
And misuse of the offerings made to the Three Jewels, in devotion and for the dead,
jinsek mechö di yi dak gyur chik
Be purified in the fire of this sang offering!
meché nangsi gangwé dultren ré
Let its flames fill the entire universe and every minute particle of flame
kunzang chöpé trinpung mizepa
Become an inexhaustible cloud of offerings like Samantabhadra’s
gyalwé shyingkham yong la khyab gyur chik
Pervading throughout all the buddha realms!
meché yeshe ö ngé chöjin zer
May these flames, offering-rays of five-coloured lights of wisdom,
rik druk narmé né su khyab gyurpé
Pervade throughout the six classes of beings, down to the Avīci Hells,
kham sum khorwa jalü ökur drol
The three realms of saṃsāra be liberated into the rainbow body,
dro kün changchub nyingpor sangye shok
And all sentient beings awaken into the heart of enlightenment!
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
100 times, 1000 times, or more—as many as you can
7. Conclusion
ku sum dakpa nö kyi shyalyé su
All is purified into the three kāyas: the environment, a heavenly palace where
chö long trul sum nangsi zukpung nam
Dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya—the forms and aggregates of phenomenal existence,
dütsir shyuwé ja ö barnang gang
Melt into nectar, flooding the whole expanse of the sky with rainbow light.
khorwa nyangdé zakmé dütsi chü
Saṃsāra is liberated into nirvāṇa; this essence of immaculate nectar
tokmé dü né danta yenché du
I share with all those who, from beginningless time until now,
nangsi drön du gyurpa yong la ngo
Have been guests in worldly existence.
sa lam drebü yönten tarchin shying
Having attained all the noble qualities of the stages, paths and fruition,
ta gom chöpé barché kün sal né
And dispelled all obstacles in view, meditation and action,
mejung kunzang tuk kyi khaying su
Within the sky-like space of Samantabhadra’s wondrous wisdom mind,
shyönnu bumkur tensi zinpar shok
May we seize the stronghold of the youthful vase body!
khorwé gyatso chenpo tongpé tar
And when at last the great ocean of saṃsāra is emptied;
womin pema drawar sangye shok
May all beings attain buddhahood in the Lotus Net of Akaniṣṭha!
pung kham sekdzé trakdang ziji bar
The sang offerings of the aggregates and elements blaze in vivid, brilliant splendour!
kar mar changsem sekdzé detong bar
The sang offerings of red and white bodhicitta blaze in bliss and emptiness!
tongnyi nyingjé sekdzé chöying gang
The sang offerings of emptiness and compassion fill the dharmadhātu!
nangsi khordé dorjé ö ngé shyir
Upon the ground of five-coloured vajra light of phenomenal existence, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
lhündrub dzok sangyepé sekdzé bul
I offer the sang offering of spontaneously accomplished perfect buddhahood.
ngön gyi lenchak tamché jang gyur chik
May all my karmic debts from the past be purified!
danta gyü la miné tol lo shak
In the present so they do not remain in my mindstream, I confess them!
ma ong dribpé khorlor magyur chik
And in the future, may I never be drawn into the wheel of obscuration!
sotar changsem rigpa dzinpa yi
All impairments of the vows of individual liberation, bodhisattva precepts,
dom ché labpa sang ngak damtsik rik
And samayas of the vidyādharas,
tsor dang matsor nyampa tol lo shak
Conscious or unwitting, I openly admit.
ne dön drib dang mitsang dak gyur chik
May illness, harmful influence, obscurations and impurities be purified!
né muk tsön gyi kalpa shyi gyur chik
May this age of plague, famine and warfare be pacified!
tami ü su ongwé sünma dok
May the attacks of invaders be repelled!
chödzé lama dendren barché dok
May obstructing forces that cause the spiritual teacher to depart be averted!
böyul trami shipé te ngen dok
May inauspicious bad omens for the whole world and the land of Tibet be averted!
za lu gyalpö sok uk düpa dok
May the planetary forces, nāgas and arrogant king-like spirits, who cut short the breath of
life, be repelled!
jikpa chenpo gyé dang chudruk dok
May the eight great fears and sixteen lesser fears be overcome!
dakchak khor ché trami shipa dok
For me and all those round me, may all that is inauspicious be averted!
damsi gongpö tutob nüpa dok
May the powers and strength of samaya-breakers and gongpo demons be averted!
Samaya!
When counting the number of recitations of Riwo Sangchö, return to “droom, rinchen natsok...”,
then say the three syllables “oṃ āḥ hūṃ” as much as possible, then “ku sum dakpa...” and
so on.
8. Dedication
gyalwa chöpé nyé gyur chik
May all the buddhas be pleased with this offering!
damchen tukdam kong gyur chik
May the solemn promise of the protectors be fulfilled!
rik druk döpa tsim gyur chik
May the wishes of the six classes of beings be satisfied!
lenchak shakhön jang gyur chik
May the enmity of karmic debtors be assuaged!
tsok nyi yongsu dzok gyur chik
May we complete the accumulation of merit and wisdom!
drib nyi bakchak dak gyur chik
May we purify cognitive and emotional defilements, and karmic traces!
dampa ku nyi tob gyur chik
May we attain the dharmakāya and rūpakāya, for the benefit of self and others!

jinpa gyachen gyurpa di yi tü
Through the power of this vast act of generosity
drowé döndu rangjung sangye shok
May we spontaneously attain buddhahood for the benefit of beings!
ngön gyi gyalwa nam kyi madrolwé
All those who were not liberated by the buddhas of the past,
kyewö tsok nam jinpé drol gyur chik
Through this act of generosity, may they be liberated!

jungpo gangdak dir ni lhak gyur tam
May all the spirits gathered in this place,
sa am önté barnang khö kyang rung
Be it on the earth or in the water or in the sky,
kyegu nam la taktu jamjé ching
Always show goodwill and kindness to all beings,
nyin dang tsen du chö la chöpar shok
And practise Dharma day and night!

gewa di yi kyewo kün
Through the positivity and merit of this, may all beings
sönam yeshe tsok dzok shing
Complete the accumulation of merit and wisdom,
sönam yeshe lé jungwé
And from this merit and wisdom,
dampa ku nyi tobpar shok
May they attain the dharmakāya and rūpakāya, for the benefit of self and others!

bé dang tsolwé magöpa
Untainted by effort and exertion
yishyin norbu paksam shing
A wish-fulfilling jewel, a wish-granting tree,
semchen rewa kong dzepa
May I fulfil the hopes of sentient beings
sampa drubpé tashi shok
And may all be auspicious to accomplish their desires!

Make everything positive and well with auspicious prayers such as these.

From the many ways, elaborate or condensed, of doing this practice, I Jñāna (Dudjom Rinpoche),
an old yogin, composed this abbreviated version for daily practice.

| Rigpa Translations, revised 2016.

Source: ’Jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. “Ri bo bsang mchod kyi ngag 'don khrigs bkol” in bDud 'joms
gsung 'bum. 25 vols. Kalimpong: 1979–1985. (TBRC W20869) vol. 23, pp. 527–533