The Daily Practice of the Secret Sādhana of Dorje Drolö
by Dudjom Rinpoche

Taking Refuge and Arousing Bodhicitta
namo, lama wang drak herukar
Namo! In the guru, the powerful and wrathful heruka,
kyab chi dro dön changsem kyé
I take refuge. For the sake of all beings, I arouse bodhicitta.
Three times
The Visualization
hung, kechik rangnyi drowolö
Hūṃ! Instantaneously I visualize myself as Dorje Drolö:
muk nak trotum amtsik dam
Reddish-brown, ferociously wrathful and chewing his lower lip;
yé yön dorjé chakpur deng
His right hand wields a vajra, his left a kīla of iron;
zabber chögö saklham sol
Clad in a brocade gown, Dharma robes and boots;
utra yé khyil dunglong trol
His hair curls to the right, and his conch earrings rattle.
tö lön trengwa doshal chang
Adorned with a garland of freshly severed human heads,
yeshe mepung barwé long
Amidst a blaze of wisdom fire,
takmo drümé teng na gying
He is poised on a tigress who has just given birth.
tukkar nyi teng hung mar tar
In his heart, on a sun disc, around a red hūṃ
tsawé ngak kyi korwar gom
Revolves the root mantra.
hung hung hung
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
and
om ah hung benza guru drowolö loka sarwa siddhi hung hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru drowolö loka sarva siddhi hūṃ hūṃ
Recite as many as you can
The Dissolution
At the end of the recitation:
hung hung hung
With hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ, everything dissolves into clear light.
pé pé pé
With phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ, once again assume the form of the deity.
Dedication of Merit and Prayer of Auspiciousness
gé di dak dang drowa kün
Through this merit, may I and all beings
dü dul drolö kur min né
Mature into the form of Dorjé Drolö, subjugator of māras,
dü shyi yul lé namgyal té
And be utterly victorious in battle over the four māras,
khorwa dongtruk tashi shok
So that all is auspicious for us to empty the depths of saṃsāra.
Accordingly, make prayers of dedication, aspiration and auspiciousness.

Composed by Jikdral Yeshé Dorjé for the practice of some of his devoted American students.

| Rigpa Translations

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "gro lod gsang sgrub rgyun khyer" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral
ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 236–237

Version: 1.2-20211217