The Concentrated Essence
A Concise Practice of Healing and Purifying (Sojong) the Three Sets of Vows
by Dudjom Rinpoche

Namo gurave!
The most important practice for those who have set out upon the path is to exert oneself in
the means to purify (jong) any failure to follow the rules of conduct related to the three
sets of vows and to revitalize (so) or increase the qualities of wisdom . Among the numerous
ways of doing this, what follows here is an essential distillation, an unelaborate approach
that is convenient for regular practice. For this, arange as many offerings as you can
afford before a sacred support. Then consider that you engage in the practice of Sojong
in the actual presence of the guru, Lord of Sages, victorious buddhas and their heirs. First,
in order to purify any faults and downfalls common to both the vows of individual liberation
and the vows of the bodhisattvas, recite the Bodhisattvas' Confession of Downfalls
completely. Then, practice the following healing and purification through tranquility, which
relates to both the greater and lesser vehicles:

karma rabrib marmé dang
Like a star, hallucination, candle,
gyuma zilpa chubur dang
Magical illusion, dewdrop, bubble,
milam lok dang trin tabur
Dream, lightning or a cloud—
düjé chö nam detar ta
Know all compounded phenomena to be like this.

chö nam tamché gyu lé jung
All dharmas originate from causes.
dé gyu deshyin shekpé sung
The Tathāgata has taught these causes,
gyu la gokpa gang yinpa
And also that which puts a stop to these causes—
gejong chenpö diké sung
This too has been taught by the Great Śramaṇa.

dikpa chiyang mija shying
Commit not a single unwholesome action,
gewa pünsum tsokpar ché
Cultivate a wealth of virtue,
rang gi sem ni yongsu dul
Tame completely this mind of ours—
di ni sangye tenpa yin
This is the teaching of the buddhas.

lü kyi dompa lekpa na
When the vows of the body are well kept,
ngak gi dompa lekpa yin
The vows of speech are also well kept.
yi kyi dom lekpa na
When the vows of mind are well kept,
tamché du ni dompa lek
All positive vows are kept as well.
tamché sungwé gejong dak
Virtuous practitioners who guard all
dukngal kün lé ngé drol lo
Are sure to be freed from every suffering.
And, should you wish to make the practice more elaborate, recite:
om amogha shila sambhara sambhara bhara bhara maha shuddha satva padma vibhushita bhudza dhara
dhara samanta awalokite hung pé soha
oṃ amoghaśīla saṃvara saṃvara vara vara mahā-śuddha-sattva-padma-vibhūṣita-puja-dhara-dhara-samanta-avalokite
hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Thus recite the dhāraṇī of pure discipline twenty-one times or as many times as you can. At
the end continue with:
trim kyi tsultrim kyönmé ching
May my discipline be free from any flaw,
tsultrim nampar dak dangden
May my discipline be completely pure,
lomsem mepé tsultrim kyi
With discipline devoid of complacent pride,
tsultrim parol chin dzok shok
May I complete the pāramitā of discipline.
And:
gyalwa kün gyi jesu lob gyur té
Following in all the buddhas’ footsteps,
zangpo chöpa yongsu dzok jé ching
May I bring Good actions to full perfection;
tsultrim chöpa drimé yong dakpa
May my conduct and discipline be flawless and pure,
taktu ma nyam kyönmé chöpar shok
May it never fail me or be at fault.
Thus make prayers of aspiration.
Then for the Sojong of the bodhicitta of aspiration and application, begin with the seven-branch
offering:
1. Prostration
jinyé su dak chok chü jikten na
To all the buddhas, the lions of the human race,
dü sum shekpa mi yi sengé kün
In all directions of the universe, through past and present and future:
dak gi malü dedak tamché la
To every single one of you, I bow in homage;
lü dang ngak yi dangwé chak gyi o
Devotion fills my body, speech and mind.

zangpo chöpé mönlam tob dak gi
Through the power of this prayer, aspiring to Good Action,
gyalwa tamché yi kyi ngönsum du
All the victorious ones appear, vivid here before my mind
shying gi dul nyé lü rab tüpa yi
And I multiply my body as many times as atoms in the universe,
gyalwa kün la rabtu chaktsal lo
Each one bowing in prostration to all the buddhas.
2. Offering
dul chik teng na dul nyé sangye nam
In every atom preside as many buddhas as there are atoms,
sangye sé kyi ü na shyukpa dak
And around them, all their bodhisattva heirs:
detar chö kyi ying nam malüpa
And so I imagine them filling
tamché gyalwa dak gi gangwar mö
Completely the entire space of reality.

dedak ngakpa mizé gyatso nam
Saluting them with an endless ocean of praise,
yang kyi yenlak gyatsö dra kün gyi
With the sounds of an ocean of different melodies
gyalwa kün gyi yönten rab jö ching
I sing of the buddhas’ noble qualities,
dewar shekpa tamché dak gi tö
And praise all those who have gone to perfect bliss.

metok dampa trengwa dampa dang
To every buddha, I make offerings:
silnyen nam dang jukpa duk chok dang
Of the loveliest flowers, of beautiful garlands,
marmé chok dang dukpö dampa yi
Of music and perfumed ointments, the best of parasols,
gyalwa dedak la ni chöpar gyi
The brightest lamps and finest incense.

naza dampa nam dang dri chok dang
To every buddha, I make offerings:
chema purma rirab nyampa dang
Exquisite garments and the most fragrant scents,
köpa khyepar pakpé chok kün gyi
Powdered incense, heaped as high as Mount Meru,
gyalwa dedak la ni chöpar gyi
Arranged in perfect symmetry.

chöpa gang nam lamé gya chewa
Then the vast and unsurpassable offerings—
dedak gyalwa tamché la yang mö
Inspired by my devotion to all the buddhas, and
zangpo chö la depé tob dak gi
Moved by the power of my faith in Good Actions—
gyalwa kün la chaktsal chöpar gyi
I prostrate and offer to all you victorious ones.
3. Confession
döchak shyedang timuk wang gi ni
Whatever negative acts I have committed,
lü dang ngak dang deshyin yi kyi kyang
While driven by desire, hatred and ignorance,
dikpa dak gi gyipa chi chipa
With my body, my speech and also with my mind,
dedak tamché dak gi sosor shak
Before you, I confess and purify each and every one.
4. Rejoicing
chok chü gyalwa kün dang sangye sé
With a heart full of delight, I rejoice at all the merits
ranggyal nam dang lob dang mi lob dang
Of buddhas and bodhisattvas,
drowa kün gyi sönam gangla yang
Pratyekabuddhas, those in training and the arhats beyond training,
dedak kün gyi jesu dak yi rang
And every living being, throughout the entire universe.
5. Imploring the Buddhas to Turn the Wheel of Dharma
gang nam chok chü jikten drönma nam
You who are like beacons of light shining through the worlds,
changchub rimpar sangye machak nyé
Who passed through the stages of enlightenment, to attain buddhahood, freedom from all attachment,
gönpo dedak dak gi tamché la
I exhort you: all of you protectors,
khorlo lanamepar korwar kul
Turn the unsurpassable wheel of Dharma.
6. Requesting the Buddhas Not to Enter Nirvāṇa
nya ngen da tön gang shyé dedak la
Joining my palms together, I pray
drowa kün la pen shying dewé chir
To you who intend to pass into nirvāṇa,
kalpa shying gi dul nyé shyukpar yang
Remain, for aeons as many as the atoms in this world,
dak gi talmo rab jar solwar gyi
And bring well-being and happiness to all living beings.
7. Dedication
chaktsalwa dang chö ching shakpa dang
What little virtue I have gathered through my homage,
jesu yi rang kul shying solwa yi
Through offering, confession, and rejoicing,
gewa chungzé dak gi chi sakpa
Through exhortation and prayer—all of it
tamché dak gi changchub chir ngo o
I dedicate to the enlightenment of all beings!

chok chur shyukpé sangye chomdendé tamché dang
All you buddhas who dwell in the ten directions
sa chu la nepé changchub sempa chenpo nam dang
All you great bodhisattvas on the ten levels,
lama dorjé dzinpa chenpo nam dak la gong su sol
All you great teachers, the vajra-holders, turn your mind towards me, I pray!
dak ming di shyé gyiwé
I, the one named insert name here,
changchub nyingpor chi kyi bar
Until I realize the essence of enlightenment,
sangye nam kyab su chi
Take refuge in the buddhas,
chö dang changchub sempa yi
And likewise in the Dharma,
tsok la ang deshyin kyab su chi
And the assembly of bodhisattvas.
Repeat this three times to request refuge as a preliminary, then continue with:
jitar ngön gyi deshek kyi
Just as the sugatas of former times
changchub tuk ni kyepa dang
Aroused the bodhicitta
changchub sempé labpa la
And established themselves by stages
dedak rimshyin nepa tar
In the training of a bodhisattva,
deshyin dro la pen döndu
Just so, for the benefit of beings
changchub sem ni kyé gyi shying
I will arouse bodhicitta
deshyindu ni labpa la ang
And likewise I will train
rimpa shyindu labpar gyi
Progressively in those disciplines.1
By repeating this three times you retake the bodhisattva vow and restore your past commitment.
dengdü dak tsé drebu yö
Today, my birth has been fruitful
mi yi sipa lekpar tob
I have well obtained a human existence.
dering sangye rik su kyé
Today I am born into the family of the buddhas:
sangye sé su dak deng gyur
I have become a son or daughter of the buddhas.2
dani dak gi chiné kyang
From now on, at all costs, I will perform
rik dang tünpé lé tsam té
The actions befitting to my family.
kyönmé tsünpé rik di la
I will not be a stain
nyokpar mingyur detar ja
On this faultless noble family.3
longwé chak dar pungpo lé
Just like a blind person
jitar rinchen nyepa tar
Happening upon a priceless jewel in a heap of rubbish,
deshyin jishyik tar té né
So, through some fortunate coincidence,
changchub sem ni dak la kyé
The bodhicitta has been born in me.4
dak gi dering kyobpa tamché kyi
Today, in the presence of all the protectors,
chen ngar drowa deshek nyi dang ni
I invite all beings to the state of sugata,
bardu dé lam drön duwö zin gyi
And, meanwhile, to happiness and bliss:
lha dang lhamin lasok gawar gyi
Gods, asuras and others—rejoice!5
changchub sem ni rinpoche
O sublime and precious bodhicitta,
makyepa nam kyé gyur chik
May it arise in those in whom it has not arisen;
kyepa nyampa mepa dang
May it never decline where it has arisen,
gong du gong du pelwar shok
But go on increasing further and further!
changchub sem dang mindral shying
May they not be separated from bodhicitta,
changchub chö la shyolwa dé
But be always inclined to enlightened action:
sangye nam kyi yong zung shying
May they be cared for by the buddhas, and
dü kyi lé nam pongwar shok
May they abandon harmful action.
changchub sempa nam kyi ni
May the bodhisattvas’ good wishes
dro dön tuk la gong drub shok
For benefitting beings be fulfilled.
gönpo yi ni gang gongpa
Whatever the protectors have intended for them:
semchen nam la dé jor shok
May sentient beings receive it.
semchen tamché dé dangden gyur chik
May all sentient beings be happy.
ngendro tamché taktu tongpar shok
May all the lower realms be forever empty.
changchub sempa gangdak sar shyukpa
May the aspirations of all the bodhisattvas
dedak kün gyi mönlam drubpar shok
Of the various bhūmis be fulfilled!
Should you wish to make it more elaborate, recite:
namas traiya dhikanam | tatagatanam | sarwatra atrati hata abati dharmata dalinam | asama sama
samantato | nanta bati shasani | hara hara | mara marena | bigta rak buddha dharmaté |
sara sara samabala | hasa hasa | traya traya | bhak wen | maha bara laksha ni | dzala dzala
sagaré soha
namas-traiyadhvikānām tathāgatānāṃ sarvatra-apratihata-avāpti-dharmatā-balinām asamasama samantato
'nantana-avāpti-śāsani hara hara smara smaraṇa vigata-rāga-buddha-dharmate sara sara
samabalā hasa hasa traya traya bhagavan mahā varalakṣaṇi jvala jvala sāgare svāhā
Recite this hundred-syllable mantra of the tathāgatas twenty-one times or as many times as possible.
Then for the Mantra Sojong, begin with the following in order to purify impairments and breakages:
neyul dechen barwé podrang ü
The environment is the blazing palace of great bliss, and in its centre
rik künkhyab dak lama dorjé sem
Is the lord who encompasses all buddha families, the guru Vajrasattva—
karsal dzumden dorjé dril chakchen
Brilliant white, smiling, and holding vajra and bell.
longkü ché dzok nyemma yum dang jor
He has all the saṃbhogakāya accoutrements and is in union with the consort Vajragarvā.
pé dar kyiltrung jalü gyumé ku
Seated cross-legged upon a lotus and moon disc, he has an illusory rainbow form
ögur long na gyepé gong té shyuk
And considers me with joy from within his pavilion of light.
With this visualize Vajrasattva in the sky before you as a support for the practice.
Then recite the Ultimate Inexpressible Confession (Oṃ yeshe kuchok…) and at the end recite the
hundred-syllable mantra twenty-one times or as many times as you can. Having purified impairments
and breakages in this way, continue with:
lama dorsem ku yi neshyi lé
From the four centres in the body of Guru Vajrasattva
özer jungwa dak gi neshyir tim
Rays of light emerge to dissolve into my four centres.
ku sung tuk dang yeshe dorjé yi
Through this, I receive the blessings of enlightened body, speech and mind
jin gyi lab né wang shyi tobpar gyur
And vajra wisdom and obtain the four empowerments.
In this way, you reawaken the wisdom of the causal empowerment by receiving the path empowerments.
om dewar shekpa khyé chindra
Oṃ. Sugata, whatever you are like,
dendra khonar dak gyur chik
May I become exactly the same,
chöpa mejung samyé pa
And carry out wondrous, inconceivable actions
dro la pen chir dak gi ché
In order to bring benefit to beings.
changchub sem chok dompa dang
The vows of a supreme bodhisattva
ku sung tuk kyi chakgya di
And the mudrās of body, speech and mind,
sok gi chir yang mi tong na
Even at the cost of my own life, I shall not forsake.
dorjé gyalpö jinlab dzö
Vajra king, inspire me with your blessings.
dü ngen tamé jikten dir
In this world during the final phase of this degenerate age,
sangye dzé ka dak gi drub
May I accomplish whatever is difficult for the buddhas,
changchub ché ka dak gi ché
And may I do whatever the bodhisattvas find demanding.
dorjé naljor kyilkhor dir
In this maṇḍala of the vajra yoga
dakchak sampa drub gyur chik
May all our aspirations be fulfilled.
Repeat this three times as a pledge never to transgress the mantra vows. Then to conclude:
lama dorsem ö shyu rang la tim
Guru Vajrasattva melts into light and dissolves into me.
riktong dön gyi dorsem rang shyal ta
And I look into the ultimate face of Vajrasattva: awareness and emptiness.
Rest in meditation. Then finally recite:
lama yidam lhatsok gong su sol
Gurus and hosts of yidam deities, turn your attention towards us!
Etc. Sealing the practice with this profound aspiration related to the stages of the mantra
path [i.e., The Prayer of the Secret Vajra Knot].

Jigdral Yeshe Dorje arranged this convenient yet comprehensive practice in the hope that it
might benefit those for whom the elaborate forms of Sojong practice related to the three sets
of vows remain out of reach and who do not know how to reduce everything to the essential
points.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.
↑ from the Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.23-24↑ from the Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.26↑ from the Bodhicaryāvatāra,
III.27↑ from the Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.28↑ from the Bodhicaryāvatāra, III.34