The Drumbeat of Immortality
A Prayer for the Long Life of the Great Tertön Dudjom Jigdral Yeshe Dorje
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om swasti
Oṃ svasti!
tsa sum kündü gyalwang tsokyé jé
From the white blessing clouds of knowledge, love and power
khyen tsé nüpé jinlab trin kar lé
Of the Lake-born Lord, mighty and victorious embodiment of the Three Roots,
pendé metok char du nyilwa dang
Let flower-like rains of benefit and happiness descend
lhenchik sa sum tashi gelek tsol
To bring auspiciousness, virtue and positivity to the three worlds.

orgyen jé dang drok ben lo tsa yi
Supreme nirmāṇakāya emanation of the vidyādhara Dudjom,
yeshe chik nyi dumar charwé trul
Who was the crowning adornment of a hundred adepts
drub gyé tsukgyen rigdzin düjom jé
And a magical manifestation of the unique wisdom
namrol chok gi tulku shyabten sol
Of the Oḍḍiyāna Lord and Drokben Lotsāwa,1 may your life remain secure!

sishyi jikdral dön kün yongsu drub
Without fear of existence or quiescence and with all your aims fulfilled,
lhami lu dang rigdzin jewé nyen
Honoured by millions of gods, humans, nāgas and vidyādharas,
dul ka marung dulwé chö kyi trir
May you remain forever upon the dharma throne
shyab sen tashi khorlo tak shyuk sol
As you train the unruly who are so difficult to tame.

khyen rab yeshe nyishyön öpoché
The fresh, brightly shining sun of your discerning wisdom
tsé chen tukjé ta dün shuk kyi drang
Is pulled by the seven horses of intense love and compassion,2
tutob sishyi münpa jom dzepa
Overpowering darkness throughout existence and peace—
pa chen lak na dorjé shyabten sol
Great and heroic Vajra in Hand, may your life remain secure!

dzamling chi dang gangchen kyendro yi
May the secret body, speech and mind of Padma’s great messenger
dekyi pal nam pelwé jepo ru
And representative remain forever sublime,
pemé ponya gyaltsab chenpo yi
Bringing magnificence, happiness and wellbeing
sang sum takpa dampar tsoshyé sol
To the beings of this world especially in the Land of Snows.

detong chok gi tulshyuk gyumé gar
May you live long, displaying the illusory, magical dance
miktrul tabur tsen dang zabter gyi
Of the supreme yogic discipline of bliss and emptiness,
gopar gyatrak jé ching chö kyi dzö
And opening a hundred doors to profound treasures,
tang mar dal shyin shyukpar solwa deb
Thereby revealing an extensive treasury of Dharma.

kalzang dulja tarpé lam du gö
May you set fortunate disciples on the path to liberation,
shyenpen trinlé pata yepa dang
Carry out infinite activity for the benefit of others,
nakchok dü kyi golwa kün shyi né
Pacify the menacing attacks of dark demonic forces,
gelek dzokden nangwé khyab gyur chik
And usher in the brilliant dawn of a perfect age of excellence!

The one who holds the name of an incarnation of Jamyang Khyentse offered this prayer for the
long life of the supreme guardian whose wondrous activity is wise, loving and powerful from
the Dharma centre of Dzongsar Tashi Lhatse in Dokham on an auspicious date during the Earth
Ox year. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “Gter chen bdud ‘joms ‘jigs bral ye shes rdo rjer zhabs
brtan du gsol ba ‘chi med rnga sgra/“ in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum.
12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 3: 527–528

Version 1.0-20210607
↑ Also known as Khyeuchung Lotsāwa, one of the twenty-five disciples of Guru Padmasambhava.↑
In Indian mythology the sun is said to be pulled across the sky by seven horses.