The Essential Daily Practice of Vajrakīla
by Kyabjé Dudjom Rinpoche

Taking Refuge and Generating the Awakened Mind of Bodhicitta
namo, lama chok sum palchen herukar
Namo! In the guru, Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha, and the great awesome heruka
güpé kyab chi dak sok kha nyam dro
With the deepest devotion we take refuge. So that I and all beings, as limitless as the sky,
dü dra damsi yul lé namgyal chir
May be victorious over negativity, enemies and samaya-breakers,
traktung dorjé shyönnu gompar gyi
I shall practise the wrathful Vajrakumāra.
Three times
The Main Practice
The Visualization
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
tongnyi ying lé gakmé nyingjé trin
From within the space of śūnyatā arise unending clouds of compassion.
sortok yeshe rangrig hung ting nak
The wisdom of discernment—my own rigpa awareness—appears as a dark blue hūṃ.
barwé ö kyi nöchü ngödzin jang
Its blazing rays of light purify all grasping at the environment and beings as real:
zungwé yulnang meri barwé dal
All the objects of grasping become the maṇḍala of the Burning Mountain Charnel Ground,
rangjung lhündrub köpa jam lé ü
Naturally arisen, its features spontaneously perfect and limitless. And in its centre,
dzinsem dakpa gyu yi trodu lé
My grasping mind in its pure nature is the causal syllable, that radiates and absorbs rays of
light,
sangye kün gyi chizuk palchenpo
Transforming into the complete embodiment of all the buddhas, the great awesome heruka,
ting nak u sum yé kar yön mar shyal
Dark blue, with three heads, the right face white, the left one red,
chak druk yé nyi dorjé tsé gu nga
And with six hands—the two on the right hold nine- and five- pointed vajras,
yön nyi barwé mé dang khatamka
The two on the left wield a blazing fireball and khaṭvāṅga trident,
ta nyi rirab purbu dril shying deb
The last two roll and ply a kīla the size of Mount Meru.
shyab shyi dortab lhachen pomo dzi
His four legs, in a striding posture, trample on Mahādeva and Mahādevi.
trotum zöpar kawé langtsochen
He rages with overwhelming ferocity and vigour,
dorjé shokpa durtrö palché dzok
With vajra wings and all the heruka and charnel-ground ornaments,
gyendeb ngokya yön né trilwé yum
In union with his consort the pale blue Dīptacakrā, who embraces him from his left hand side,
khatam dungtrak dzin dang nyampar jor
Clutching a khaṭvāṅga trident and a skull cup.
chiwor yeshe jakhyung pur shying ding
Above their heads, the wisdom garuḍa wheels and soars,
natsok pema nyima barwé teng
As they pace upon a lotus of many colours, and blazing sun disc,
kalmé drak tu trukpé long du rol
Amid the violent, swirling flames of the universal inferno.

tsitta chong muk ö kyi gurkhyim ü
In his heart, in the centre of a reddish-brown dome of light,
yeshe sempa dorsem ting sal gyi
Presides the jñānasattva, a brilliant blue Vajrasattva,
tuk ü tingdzin sempa dorjé ter
In the middle of whose heart stands a vajra, the samādhisattva, and there in its belly appears
hung tar ngak treng baidur shyünmé dang
Hūṃ, around which the mantra mālā, gleaming like molten lapis lazuli,
yé su kor lé samyé özer trö
Rotates to the right, sending inconceivable rays of light streaming out
pak chö drowé drib sal damchen kul
To make offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, purify all the obscurations of sentient
beings, urge on the protectors,
dragek tsarché nang drak tokpé chö
And destroy hostile and obstructing forces. All appearances, sounds and thoughts
lha ngak chönyi yeshe rolpar shar
Arise as the wisdom play of deity, mantra and dharmatā.
om benza kili kilaya sarva bighanen bam hung pé | dza hung ah
oṃ vajra kīli kīlaya sarva vighnān baṃ hūṃ phaṭ | jaḥ hūṃ āḥ ||
Dissolution
nöchü ö shyu rang tim rangnyi kyang
The environment and beings melt into light, then dissolve into me.
kha la trin shyin ösal ying su yal
Then I too merge into the radiant space of luminosity, like a cloud into the sky.
laryang zungjuk gyumé chakgyar sé
Yet again, awakening in the illusory mudrā of union,
go sum mishik dorjé go dangden
My body, speech and mind bear the indestructible vajra armour.
The Dedication of Merit
gewa di yi dak dang semchen kün
Through the merit of this, may I and all sentient beings
dü lé namgyal barché kün shyi shying
Triumph over negativity and eliminate all obstacles,
dorjé shyönnu nyangen depé chok
And may this be the certain cause for us all to attain the fruition of enlightenment:
drebu changchub ngepar nyé gyur chik
The supreme nirvāṇa of Vajrakumāra!
The Prayer for Auspiciousness
jinlab chok tsol tsa gyü lama dang
May the root and lineage masters, who grant the supreme blessing,
ngödrub char beb yidam kilaya
The yidam Kīlaya, who showers down a rain of siddhis,
trinlé tokmé khandro chökyong sok
And the ḍākinīs and dharmapālas, whose activities are unobstructed,
rabjam kyilkhor khorlö tashi shok
Make all be auspicious in the circle of this infinite maṇḍala!

This was written spontaneously by Jikdral Yeshé Dorjé at the request of one called Pema.

| Rigpa Translations

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "rdo rje phur bu'i rgyun gyi rnal 'byor snying por dril
ba" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung Lama,
1979–1985. Vol. 25: 173–175

Version: 2.2-20211217