The Blazing Tower
A Daily Practice of Uṣṇīṣa-Sitātapatrā
by Dudjom Rinpoche

namo guru uṣṇīṣāya

The Preparation
lama chok sum dukkarmor
In the Guru, Three Jewels, and Sitātapatrā,
güpé kyab chi khanyam dro
With the deepest devotion I take refuge.
lamé changchub chok tob chir
So that all beings, as limitless as the sky, reach unsurpassed awakening,
tsuktor barma gompar gyi
I shall meditate on blazing Sitātapatrā.
With this, take refuge and arouse bodhicitta.
semchen dé dangden gyur chik
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness!
dukngal kün dang dralwar shok
May they be freed from every kind of suffering!
dé dang taktu mindral shying
May they never want for happiness!
chö kün nyamnyi tokpar shok
May they realize the equality of all phenomena!
With this, practice the four immeasurables.
The Main Part
chö nam tongpé ngang nyi lé
Within the state of the emptiness of all phenomena,
miché dorjé sungkhor ü
Appears an indestructible vajra protection circle.
tsen dzok rinchen shyalyé ter
In its centre, within a precious palace, perfect in every aspect,
sengtri pe de den gyi teng
Upon a lion throne and a lotus and moon-disc seat,
om lé khorlo om gyi tsen
Rests the syllable oṃ, from which appears a wheel marked with the syllable oṃ.
dé lé ö trö pakpa chö
Rays of light radiate forth making offerings to the noble ones,
semchen dön jé dön gek chom
Accomplishing the benefit of sentient beings, and eliminating all evil forces and obstacles.1
tsur dü yong gyur kechik gi
As the light gathers back, it transforms instantly
rangnyi tsuktor gyalmo kar
And I take the form of the white Uṣṇīṣa Queen,
shyi gek tro ngam u tong den
With a thousand heads—peaceful, mesmerizing, furiously raging—
jewa gya tong chen gyi tam
Covered with a trillion2 eyes.
chak tong khorlo dukkar sok
With her thousand arms she brandishes weapons,
barwé tsöncha natsok chang
Wheels, white parasols and so forth, all ablaze.
shyab tong kyangkum rol tab kyi
Her thousand legs in the posture of royal ease, stretched out, or drawn in
dön gek jungpö tsok nam nön
Stomp down upon all evil forces, obstacles and spirits.
lhadzé rinchen gyenché lub
Adorned with jewels and precious divine garments,
özer nangwa jam lé ü
She stands within a limitless expanse of blazing light.
dorjé yangpa chenpo yi
She is the Great Exalted Vajra,
sa sum kyilkhor wang dzé ma
Ruler of the maṇḍala of the three planes of existence,
chewé daknyi chenmor gyur
Mighty queen with exceptional power.
né sum dru sum tuk ü su
Her three places are marked with oṃ, āḥ, and hūṃ, and in her heart’s centre,
da teng om yikkar pö tsen
Upon a moon disc is a white syllable oṃ.
dé lé ö trö rang drawé
Rays of light radiate forth inviting the wisdom ladies3
yeshe sem ma chendrang tim
In the same forms as myself, who melt into me.
benza samadza dza hung bam ho nyimé gyur
With vajra-samājaḥ, jaḥ, hūṃ, baṃ, hoḥ we merge indissociably.
laryang wanglha chendrang té
Once again, the empowerment deities4 are invoked
bumpé dütsi wangkurwé
And they grant the empowerment with the amṛta flowing from their vases.
lü gang drib dak nam nang dzé
The amṛta fills my body, clearing all obscurations. With Vairocana as their chief,
tso jé rik ngé ugyen gyur
The buddhas of the five families then adorn Sitātapatrā’s head.
tuk sok tamar ngak treng ni
The seed syllable in her heart is encircled by the mantra garland,
mutik dang ö tserwé kor
Which shines like shimmering pearls as it spins.
ö trö sangye changsem kyi
Light radiates forth,
jinlab nüpa tamché dü
Gathering all the potent blessings of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
rang tim tutob yeshe gyé
As the blessings dissolve into me, my power and wisdom increase.
gang dul trinlé nampa shyi
I perform the four activities according to beings’ needs, and
tokmé yishyin drubpar gyur
Everything is effortlessly accomplished just as I wish.
tayata om analé analé khassamé khassamé bairé bairé somé somé sarva buddha adhishtana adhishtité
sarva tatagatoshnisha sitatapatré hung pé hung mama hung ni soha
tadyathā | oṃ anale anale | khasame khasame | vaire vaire | saumye saumye | sarva-buddhādiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite
sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatre hūṃ phaṭ | hūṃ ma ma hūṃ ni svāhā ||
This is the mantra of the approach phase.

om sarva tatagatoshnisha hung pé hung mama hung ni soha
oṃ sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa hūṃ phaṭ | hūṃ ma ma hūṃ ni svāhā ||
Then, recite this, the quintessence mantra, as many times as you can.

chakgya gom shing rik ngak depé den tob kyi dak dang sungja dön dang jikpa tamché lé sungwar
gyur
By the power and truth of actualizing your divine form and reciting your vidyā-mantra, I and
all in need of protection are relieved from every evil force and danger.
chomdendé deshyin shekpé tsuktor né jungwé dukkarmo chen dorjé tsuktor chirdokpa chenmo chak
tong ngawa chenmo u tong ngawa chenmo chen jewa gya tong ngawa chenmo miché barwé tsentak
chen dorjé yangpa chenpo sa sum gyi kyilkhor la nga dzepa chenmö künné dakchak khor dang
chepa la sung du sol lo
Blessed Sitātapatrā Born from Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, Vajroṣṇīṣā, Great Dispeller, great goddess
with a thousand arms, great goddess with a thousand heads, great goddess with a trillion
eyes and indestructible blazing characteristics, Great Exalted Vajra Goddess, 5 ruler of the
maṇḍala of the three planes of existence,6 please protect me and all who depend on me.
jikpa dang dön tamché lé dak delek su gyur chik
Relieve us from each and every evil force and danger!
rim lasokpé né tamché rabtu sal du sol lo
Dispel all diseases and illnesses!
rigpa dang chakgyé tsok tamché kyi dak la sung du sol lo
Protect us in your every appearance as vidyā and mudrā deities!
tayata om sarva tathagata om katom bendha bendha mama raksha raksha soha om katom bendha bendha
benza mama raksha raksha benza pani hung pé soha
tadyathā | oṃ ṣṭom bandha bandha mama rāḳsa rāḳsa svāhā || oṃ ṣṭoṃ bandha bandha vajra mama
rāḳsa rāḳsa vajrapāṇi hūṃ phaṭ svāhā ||
Recite this mantra as many times as you can.

semchen gang su dak dak la dukpa dang drakshul dang dikpa dang trukpa dang dangwa dang dedak
gi sem dang denpa nam jampé sem dang denpar gyur né dak dang semchen tamché sung du sol
Impart a loving mindset to all those who are harmful and aim to do us harm, who are dangerous
or harbor dangerous intentions, who are evil or harbor evil intentions, who are vicious
or harbor vicious intentions, who are aggressive or harbor aggressive intentions! Protect
us and all beings!
lo gya tsowar gyur chik
Make us live a hundred years!
tön gya tongwar gyur chik
Let us see a hundred autumns!
Having said this, imagine that:
ku lé mé tsön trowö tsok pak tu mepa tröpé pé gol jepur bötong sok mitünpé chok tamché zir dok
ching té tsarché par gyur
An immeasurable mass of fire, weapons, and wrathful deities shoots forth from my body, crushing,
expelling, binding and thus exterminating all opposing forces, sorcery, witchcraft, and
adversities:
chomdendé deshyin shekpé tsuktor né jungwé dukkarmo chen shyen gyi mitubpa chirdokpa chenmö
rigpa dang chakgya dang ngak kyi tsok kyi denpé tob dang ziji kyi tu yi dak khor dang chepé
dangwa dang milam ngenpa dang té ngenpa dang né dang dra dang jikpa tamché chirdok par gyur
chik
Blessed Sitātapatrā Born from the Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, Vajroṣṇīṣā, Great Dispeller: By the power
and truth of your vidyās, mudrās, and mantras and by the force of your might and majesty,
for us, our family and friends, all hatred, bad dreams, evil omens, diseases, enemies
and dangers are averted!
lha dang drangsong dang rik ngak chang wa dang dön dang jungpo dang dorna jikten dang jikten
lé depa gang su ang rung dukpé sem kyi jepé rik ngak ché do purbü dab bo
Whether of gods, ṛṣis, sorcerers, evil forces, spirits, or otherwise, in short, the spells cast
by all wicked beings whether worldly or beyond are broken! They are struck with the kīla!
om sarva tatagatoshnisha analé avalokité tsurnaté dzorasi om dzala dzala dhaka dhaka dhara dhara
vidhara vidhara tsasindha tsasindha bhindha bhindha hung hung pé pé soha
oṃ sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣānale avalokite curṇate jvarāśi || oṃ jvala jvala dhaka dhaka dhara dhara
vidhara vidhara chinda chinda bhindha bhindha hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā ||
Recite this mantra many times.
If you wish, at this point, you can add the Prayer for Averting Obstacles composed by Drupchen
Lekyi Dorjé:7
chomden dukkar lhatsok nam
Blessed Sitātapatrā, and your hosts of deities,
tutob tokpa mi nga shying
Through your unobstructed power and strength,
tukjé mönlam tutsenpé
And the force of your compassionate aspirations,
dak gi jitar solwa shyin
May you fulfil these prayers of ours:
sangye tenpa darwa dang
Cause the teachings of Buddha to flourish,
semchen dé dang denpar dzö
And all beings to gain happiness!
gyujor yöndak khor ché kyi
For our patrons and those around us,
chak ché nyam nga dok tu sol
May tragedy and disaster be averted!
milam tsenma ngenpa dok
May all bad signs in dreams be dispelled!
tak dang tendrel ngenpa dok
May all inauspicious omens and circumstances be averted!
dra dré samjor ngenpa dok
May the malevolence and harm of enemies and hostile forces be averted!
té ngen gyechu tsa shyi dok
May the eighty-four evil omens be averted!
yedrok sumgya drukchu dok
May the three hundred and sixty forms of daily suffering be averted!
né rik shyigya tsa shyi dok
May the four hundred and four types of disease8 be averted!
gek rik tongtrak gyechu dok
May the eighty thousand types of obstacle-making forces be averted!
dümin chiwa nam gyé dok
May the eight kinds of untimely death be averted!
yé kyi dü du yöpa dok
May initial misfortune be averted!9
mé kyi siru langpa dok
May persistent misfortune be averted!10
tralwé shé du köpa dok
May fatal conflict be averted!
pamé dursi langpa dok
May misfortune arising from mistreatment of ancestral spirits be averted!
mil né du tongwa dok
May sickness among men and women be averted!
chuk la gökha jepa dok
May loss in our resources be averted!
nam gyi dalkha tebpa dok
May calamities in the atmosphere be averted!
sayi dukda yöpa dok
May calamities on the earth be averted!
mewa parkha ngenpa dok
May unfavourable signs in astrological squares and trigrams be averted!
kek dang pungsi langpa dok
May astrological hindrances and recurrent calamity be averted!
mitün chok kün dok gyur chik
May all adversity be averted!11
When reciting this prayer clap your hands.
The Conclusion
nöchü rang tim daknyi kyang
The universe and all its inhabitants dissolve into me,
mimik chö kyi ying su yal
And I too dissolve into the dharmadhātu, beyond reference.
lar yang zuk kyi kur shar té
Once again, I arise in the form of the deity,
dorjé sum gyi sungwar gyur
Protected as such by the three vajras.

gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the merit of this, may I swiftly
tsuktor gyalmo drub gyur né
Attain the realization of the Uṣṇīṣa Queen
drowa chik kyang malüpa
And thereby every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Likewise reach this state of perfection!
Thus conclude the practice with this and other prayers of dedication and auspiciousness.

This practice, suitable for daily recitation, was compiled by Jikdral Yeshé Dorjé. Jayantu!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2020 (trans. Stefan Mang, ed. Lowell Cook). Prayer for Averting
Obstacles by Lhodrak Namkha Gyaltsen (alias Drupchen Lekyi Dorjé) courtesy of Rigpa Translations,
2008.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "gtsug tor gdugs dkar mo'i rgyun khyer 'bar ba'i thog brtsegs"
in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong: Dupjung
Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 252–258

Version: 1.2-20211217
↑ ‘Evil force’ here and throughout this translation renders the Tibetan word “gdon” (“graha”
in Sanskrit). Grahas are understood to be both evil spirits and evil influences that are
contained within or connected with a particular spirit or deity. They are also closely associated
with the planets and other astronomical bodies. Grahas can inflict great harm on the
human body and mind. For more information, see: Gail Hinich Sutherland, The Disguises of
the Demon: The Development of the Yakṣa in Hinduism and Buddhism (Albany: State University
of New York Press, 1992), 166–167.↑ That is 10 to the power of 12.↑ The Tibetan (ye shes
sems ma; jñānasattvā) emphasizes that the jñānasattva or wisdom being is feminine.↑ That
is the Buddhas of the five families.↑ Great Exalted Vajra Goddess (mahāvajrodārā, rdo rje
yangs pa chen mo).↑ That is all beings living above, below and on the ground.↑ Otherwise
known as Lhodrak Namkha Gyaltsen.↑ The four hundred and four types of disease consist of:
the hundred and one karmic diseases, the hundred and one diseases of this lifetime, the hundred
and one diseases caused by harmful evil spirits, and the hundred and one superficial
diseases.↑ Alak Zenkar Rinpoche gives the example of someone whose child dies at a very early
age. It is the first time that tragedy has struck, and if not averted it can become persistent
tragedy.↑ Alak Zenkar Rinpoche gives an accident blackspot where many people die
as an example of recurrent calamity.↑ This appears to be an additional line added to Drupchen
Lekyi Dorjé’s prayer.