The Sublime Path to Immortality
The Quintessence of Profoundly Secret Pith Instructions on Attaining Vajra Longevity
by Kyabje Düdjom Rinpoche

Namo guru vajra-ayurjñānaye!
Those who wish to perform this profound longevity practice on a regular basis should rise early
in the morning before the crow wakes, take their seat upon a cushion, straighten their
body, exhale the stale air, and with single-pointed pure intention recite:
Refuge and Bodhichitta
namo, kyapné kündü lama tsé yi lhar
Namo! In the Guru of Longevity, the all-encompassing refuge,
güpé kyap chi dak sok khanyam dro
I devotedly take refuge. So that I and all beings, limitless as space,
chidak barché yül lé namgyel chir
May overcome all obstacles set by the Lord of Death,
tsé yi rigdzin druppar semkyé do
I arouse the intention to become an immortal vidyādhara.
Take refuge and generate bodhicitta while reciting this verse three times.
Visualization
ah, kechik dren dzok chu lé chu bur zhin
Ah, complete in the instant of recollection, like water poured into water,
neyül pemo dechen podrang wü
The environment becomes the Lotus Palace of Great Bliss. In its centre
rangsem dakpa hrih mar trodu lé
My mind in its purity is a red hrīḥ,1 which radiates and absorbs light,
chomden gönpo rigdzin tsepakmé
Becoming the Blessed Lord Amitāyus, the vidyādhara.
ragé dangden gyé nyi langtso chen
I am resplendent ruby red, youthful as a sixteen-year-old,
zhi dzum yi ong tsenpé zijin bar
Smiling serenely, attractive, resplendent with marks and signs.
nyam zhak chak na chimé tsebum nam
My hands rest in equanimity, holding the vase of immortality.
sang yé marser dadar bum dzin khyü
In my embrace is gold-red Guhyajñānā, holding a long-life arrow and vase.
dechen nyamjor longkü gyenché dzok
We are united in great bliss, with all sambhogakāya ornaments perfect.
nyida pé teng dorjé kyiltrung gi
As we sit in vajra posture upon a lotus and a moon-disc seat,
jazer dangmar trikpé long du röl
Within a luminous expanse of rainbow-coloured lights,
pung kham kyemché toktsok malü kün
All aggregates, elements, senses, and thoughts
döné tselhé kyilkhor lhün gyi drup
Are spontaneously, primordially present as the divine longevity maṇḍala.
chiwor pema nyidé den tengdu
Above my crown, upon a seat of lotus and moon-disc,
rik kyi dakpo pejung tsé yi dak
The Master of Longevity Padmasambhava resides, the family lord.
kar mar zhi dzum nyam zhak tsebum dzin
Red-tinged white, he smiles peacefully; in equipoise, he holds a long-life vase.2
yumchok mandhara dang nyimé jor
He is united inseparably with Mandāravā, the supreme consort.
longchö ché dzok dorjé kyiltrung chen
They are adorned with sambhogakāya ornaments and rest in vajra posture.
dé drö öpung rap bar khordé kyi
Their blissful warmth blazes as a sphere of light, drawing in
tsechü dangma düpé tsül du zhuk
All the vital essences of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
rang gi nyinggar natsok dorjé ter
At the core of the double vajra in the centre of my heart, a sun and moon disc casket
nyidé gaur ngaden tik li bup
Holds a bindu of five-coloured light
lungsem dangma hrih mar marmé tar
And the essence of prāṇa-mind—a red hrīḥ.
barwé ö kyi nöchü tong kham khyap
Like a flame, it blazes with light that fills the entire universe,
ngö nang malü hrih yik sel tser bar
Turning all apparent reality into brilliantly shining hrīḥ syllables
mermer shik shik nyizer dül tar yo
Which flicker like the dust that shimmers in sunbeams.
drakpé draké hrih dra nyen ji dang
All sounds, all voices become the marvellous resonance of hrīḥ,
bungwa tsang zhik tabur ur chem dir
Like the roaring hum of a beehive that has broken open.
toktsok rangdröl dzinmé khyapdel long
All thoughts are naturally liberated, beyond grasping, in the all-encompassing expanse.
dé teng podrel dorjé sok tu dzok
All is complete within immutable bliss-emptiness—the vajra life-force.
While actualizing the key points of this visualization, recite the syllable hrīḥ as much as
you can.
Occasionally combine the recitation with the vase-breathing, and recite the syllable in silence
or practice vajra recitation. Apply with determination the pith instructions on blazing
and dripping, in particular, and thereby cultivate the ever-youthful, deathless vajra of
great bliss. When you conclude the recitation, visualize the Guru above your head and recite
with yearning and deep devotion:
Invocation
hrih, gyelwa kün ngö chomden tsepakmé
Hrīḥ, blessed Amitāyus, quintessence of all the victors,
khyen tsé nü pé daknyi pema jung
Padmasambhava, embodiment of wisdom, love, and power,
kadrin nyammé kyap gön rinpoché
Precious lord of refuge, whose kindness is without equal,
mögü dungwa drakpö sölwa dep
I pray to you with deep yearning and devotion!
yeshé chenpö gongpé tsel kyé la
In your great wisdom, and in the light of your powerful resolve,
chimé dorjé tsé yi ngödrup tsöl
Grant me the siddhi of deathless vajra life;
dak gyü min ching drölwar dzé du söl
Please ripen and liberate my very being!
Fervently pray like this.
Receiving the Siddhi
chiwö rikdak tukgyü wangmé kül
The crowning family lord is unable to resist my invocation.
gyepé mi zö yapyum nyamjor gyi
With unbearable delight, the father and mother in their union
dewé dra dang ö kyi zhing kün khyap
Fill all realms with blissful sounds and lights,
sizhi tsechü yong dü ku la tim
And the essential vitality of existence and peace is absorbed into their forms.
lama wumé lam gyü nying wü jön
It travels down through the Guru’s central channel into his heart,
tapshé gyé röl jangsem kar mar gyün
And the flow of red and white bodhicitta, the passionate play of method and wisdom,
jortsam né bap rang lü tem sé gang
Descends from the point of their union, filling my body to the brim.
dangchü tuk sok hrih la up kyi dril
The essential vitality condenses into the life-force syllable hrīḥ.
nyidé kha drik natsok dorjé ra
The sun and moon casket closes, and the points of the double vajra
tengdu düpé dam shing gyetappé
Are entwined at the top, tightly closed and sealed.
rang lü teng sel namkhé rangzhin chen
My body has the nature of sky-like empty clarity.
chimé jalü yeshé dorjé ku
I obtain the everlasting and unchanging treasure of
takten gyurwa mepé yik tep gyur
The immortal rainbow body, the vajrakāya of primordial wisdom.
Confident in this truth, rest evenly within the immortal natural state of luminous great bliss.
Upon concluding the meditation, recite:
Dedication
dak gi chimé druppé gé tsok tü
Through the virtue gathered by this practice of deathlessness,
dro kün rigdzin tsé yi nö gyur né
May all beings become vessels for the immortal vidyādhara.
chidak münpé yülngo tar jé té
Thus, may the dark forces of the lord of death be overcome,
pendé nangwa gyepé tashi shok
Ushering in the auspicious light of joyful goodness!
Conclude by reciting further dedications of merit and prayers of auspiciousness, and then engage
in your daily activities.
This easy yet essential practice condenses the substance of the many vast and profound longevity
practices of the treasure tradition. If you strive in applying this practice you will
come to actualize these instructions, which will certainly avert the danger of an untimely
death and prolong your life.

With the primary intent that I and others may attain the deathless vajra-life-force, and at
the request of the mantrika Tendzin Chöphel from the town of Ratnapuri in Zahor, who offered
a golden flower, I, Jikdral Yeshé Dorjé, composed this practice at an auspicious astrological
juncture. Āyu-siddhirastu!

| Translated by Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (Peter Woods and Stefan Mang, ed. Libby Hogg), 2021.

Source: 'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. "rdo rje'i tshe sgrub pa'i man ngag zab gsang bcud 'dus
'chi med lam bzang" in gsung 'bum/_'jigs bral ye shes rdo rje. BDRC W20869. 25 vols. Kalimpong:
Dupjung Lama, 1979–1985. Vol. 25: 194–198

Version: 1.0-20211214
↑ ཧྲཱིཿ
↑ With a vajra ornamenting the spout.